# Chapter 12 - Education and training 

### 12.1 Why education and training are important

The use of computers is becoming ever more prevalent in our daily lives.
Their design is growing ever more intuitive and in many settings people
are used to a 'just get on with it' approach to using a new machine or
system. This approach is not appropriate for large-scale initiatives
such as using electronic records in health care. This has been
recognized for some time, as is shown in this quote from a literature
review, commissioned by the NHS Leadership Centre, from the Henley
Centre:

> *The main factors in the success or failure of the introduction of
> IT-led change initiatives are clearly shown by the evidence to be the
> human elements. It is not the technical aspects that cause major IT
> projects to fail but the 'people' aspects. Unless these are tackled
> from the outset, there is little likelihood that IT projects will be
> successful. This is true not only in health care systems but also in
> other public sector enterprises and the private sector, and not only
> in the UK but also internationally.*

*- Williams (2004)*[^1]

Similar points are made in UCL's independent evaluation of the SCR[^2],
particularly in sections *7.3. The SCR: 'Plug and play' technology or
socio-technical change? and 7.4. The change model: 'Make it happen' or
'let it emerge'? *

Sadie Williams and Trishia Greenhalgh are referring to 'engagement' and
their comments are made in a political and social context. These themes,
when expressed as motivation and learning climate, are familiar to
educators.

**Social and affective aspects of learning are at least as important to
a curriculum as is content.**

### 12.2 Learning needs

Aside from these 'hearts and minds' issues there are two particular
aspects of electronic health records that demand attention and require
specific education and training.

The first relates to the main theme of this version of GPG: i.e.
interoperability. This is dealt with in detail in the report from the
Shared Records Professional Guidance Project[^3]. Records are no longer
written primarily for the benefit of the clinician who writes them and
his or her immediate colleagues. Elements of the shared record may be
read, and relied upon, by clinicians in other teams in other locations
and in other professional groups, often at considerable distance in each
of these dimensions. They also may be read and relied upon by the
patient. When care is shared in this way the record is a form of
communication that does not merely impart data and information. The
communication may also convey expectation. For instance, a clinician in
a single contact with a patient may prescribe a medication (such as an
ACE inhibitor), which requires subsequent monitoring. It is essential
for patient safety that this expectation is passed on and understood.
It's possible to design systems and care pathways so that the
expectation and the need for subsequent clinical monitoring is clear to
all users purely from the way the information is presented on the
clinical computer system. More commonly, such transfers of
responsibility are implicit in the ways of working of local teams: the
clinical record is written in the context of this local knowledge and
understanding. This requires the clinician to be able to make
technically correct coded entries while at the same time being aware of
the contexts within which the record entry is written and later read.

The second imperative relates to the way that information, particularly
coded information, is displayed by clinical computer systems. Even the
youngest and most computer literate of clinicians have been brought up
with paper documents. On paper, position on the page and the spatial
relationship between different elements of text are part of the context
that contributes to meaning. Clinical computer systems re-present items
of information in different spatial relationships. As a consequence,
things that appear to be clearly understandable on one screen view may
not carry the same meaning so clearly when viewed on another screen
view. This is particularly true of a coded entry that is qualified by
free text. That qualification will not apply if the two items become
physically separated. Making a good record does not merely require the
correct choice of coded clinical term; it requires a contextual
understanding of how the record will appear to the reader. This
understanding includes the functionality of their individual clinical
systems -- as well as an understanding of the secondary uses that data
can be put to.

In addition there are semantic issues to consider. Different
professional groups, specialties and sub-specialties are examples of
sub-cultures that use language in different ways. They all use language
in ways that can be opaque to the general public, i.e. their patients.
These issues are dealt with in more detail in the SRPG and Record Access
reports \[ref these\] and chapter 4 of this guidance. They all hinge on
properly combining the technical accuracy of the coded clinical term and
the context in which it is being used by the writer and the reader.

**All clinicians need to know the technical aspects of which codes to
use; they all need to understand how contextual factors shape the
meanings of records; they all need to be able to use the electronic
records as a safe, effective and reliable way of communicating with
other health professionals, and their patients.**

Similar statements of need can be written for other aspects of practice
with electronic health records. In records governance, for instance,
there are technical details of how to apply each guidance or statute.
These have to be implemented in local and broader contexts. So that the
person who is sending an extract from a patient's records to an outside
organisation has the following learning needs: to be aware that
information about third parties should not be disclosed (i.e. awareness
of the principles of the NHS Code of Practice for confidentiality); to
have the technical knowledge of what constitutes a third party reference
that should be deleted or redacted and the specifics of how to do that;
local contextual knowledge of who's responsibility it is to do the check
for third party references and to ensure that the task is always done.

This is a recurring theme. Whatever the task undertaken, necessary
technical accuracy is not sufficient without considering wide and local
contexts. The relation between an understanding of the technical and of
the contextual is a fundamental characteristic of health informatics.

### 12.3 Meeting these learning needs

### 12.3.1 Training and practice management

Especially in the case of records governance, but to some extent in all
areas, some of the local and wide contextual factors may be embodied in
practice policies and protocols. So that when the practice receives a
request for an extract from records, it is clear that a check for, and
deletion of, third party references is required. The practice policy
will set out how this should be done; by whom, and how the checking
should be confirmed before dispatch. In this example the practice and
its systems are taking responsibility for the wider contexts. The
employee needs to be trained to follow practice policy and in the
technical detail of how to do the check. Equally, the practice managers
who write the policies may need guidance with that task.

Up to a point a similar approach can be used with regard to clinical
coding. Through the quality and outcomes framework clinicians and
managers have come to appreciate the need for technical accuracy in
coding and have learnt some of the costs of inaccuracy. The Framework
itself contains a limited code set for the conditions it embraces. In
other contexts, EHS and SCR for instance, restricted code sets can be
agreed and used to limit ambiguity. Their preparation and implementation
are matters of management and training.

However, large parts of the primary care repertoire are not so simple.
Not all conditions are as well circumscribed as those in the QOF, we
deal with many complaints that are not sorted into neat diagnoses while
co-morbidity and social and psychological factors add to medical
complexity. In these circumstances, business processes and structuring
of the record can only contribute so much: the note-writing clinician
must understand the communicative aspects of the record as well as being
technically proficient in coding.

The important point here is that local ways of working (business
processes in the practice, and the way that different local clinical
teams work together) have an impact on education and training needs. At
the simpler end of the spectrum it is possible to build required
understanding into business processes: so that the individual needs only
to be trained to follow protocols. As things get more complex, or where
business processes are less well developed, so the contextual
understanding required of the individual increases.

**This means that any learning needs assessment needs to take into
account aspects of practice management as well as the competencies of
the individual practitioner or staff member.**

### 12.3.2 Context and communication

The intended outcome here is that the individual will understand how
their use of a particular clinical records system or application impacts
on other users and on patient care. This requires a different approach.
While skills acquisition and learning how to do specific tasks lend
themselves to a training approach that can be relatively didactic and
put into packages that are cascaded out through e-learning or other
methods, matters of understanding often require a more discursive and
individual approach.

The individual needs to be able to relate their work to the work of
other members of their team, and also to understand how their team fits
in with the bigger picture. The rich variety of sizes and types of
General Practices, and other types of primary care provision, makes it
very difficult to achieve this level of understanding by means of
pre-prepared material whether delivered on line or in person. A
one-size-fits-all approach is inappropriate. Group discussion that
allows people to situate their experience in the wider context is much
more likely to be successful.

In terms of learning about and coming to understand the use of the
electronic record as a means of communicating with other professionals
the most useful activity is likely to be meeting with and talking to the
other professional groups involved. Much of this can be done within a
practice, but as care of one patient is increasingly shared by different
organizations so increases the benefit of people from those
organizations meeting each other.

As will be shown in the next section, the NHS website offers e-learning
support for developments such as Summary Care Record and Personal
Demographics Service. While these are invaluable as guidance and
expositions of content, they are not sufficient in themselves.
Clinicians and administrative staff need to be given the opportunity to
apply the material to their own situation, to grasp the implications of
using this technology in their work setting and in their communication
with other professionals. This kind of work is best done in facilitated
groups. This is relatively costly of resources. The cost is justified as
these human elements are the key to success of IT-led change: as
demonstrated in the quote from Sadie Williams at the start of this
chapter.

### 12.3.3 Clinical and non-clinical staff

Information handling is part of the role of everyone who works in health
care and so of everyone who works in an organisation such as a General
Practice. The scenario of third-party references illustrates this.
Informatics is beginning to be included in the undergraduate curriculum
for doctors[^4] and is being promoted for all clinicians in the e-ICE
project (see resources below). There is not the same structural support
for admin and clerical staff. As mentioned above, this falls into the
realm of practice management as an aspect of staff development and
appraisal. Ways of working, practice protocols and staff development and
appraisal should each complement the other.

**Factual guidance and pre-prepared training materials need to be
supplemented by facilitated inter-personal learning so that human
elements of learning and change can be properly addressed.**

###  12.4 Some learning resources

There are many useful resources available on the internet. The few
examples listed below are NHS related and provided by Connecting for
Health and PRIMIS+ among others. They include general material as well
as e-learning resources for specific items such as Summary Care Record,
Patient Demographics Service and Information Governance: all of which
are on the CFH e-learning resources site below;

-   *NHS CfH ETD
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/etd>*

-   *NHS CfH e-learning resources
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/capability/phi/personal/elearning>
    *

-   *E-Learning for Healthcare <http://www.e-lfh.org.uk/> *

-   *Health Learning and Skills
    <http://hlas.careers-advice.org/NHS/courses/index.html> *

-   *e-ICE project (embedding informatics in clinical education)
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/capability/health/hidcurriculum/index_html>
    *

-   *PRIMIS+ <http://www.primis.nhs.uk/>*

-   *PRIMIS+ - Find a facilitator
    <http://www.primis.nhs.uk/index.php/about-us/find-facilitator> *

-   *Discussion boards are also a useful source of information and may
    go some way to addressing the need for interaction and social
    aspects of learning;*

-   *Data Quality Guild
    <http://www.ic.nhs.uk/services/the-data-quality-programme/news-and-developments/guildspace-goes-live>!
    *

-   *PRIMIS+ <http://forum.primis.nottingham.ac.uk/>*

-   *PHCSG Discussion board <http://www.phcsg.org/index.php?p=discuss>*

-   *Clinical system supplier forums and clinical system user group
    forums are also available (see Chapter 9.8)*

[^1]: http://www.nursingleadership.org.uk/publications/LitRProfGps04%20(Henley).pdf

[^2]: http://eprints.ucl.ac.uk/6602/

[^3]: SRPG report
    <http://www.rcgp.org.uk/news_and_events/news_room/news_2009/rcgp_shared_record_professiona.aspx>

[^4]: Tomorrow's Doctors
    http://www.gmc-uk.org/education/undergraduate/tomorrows\_doctors.asp
