Chapter 11 Working in an e-business environment


### 

### 11.1 Introduction

General practices do not work in isolation from the rest of the world,
and the business culture in the UK and internationally is becoming
increasingly dependent on the internet and internet technologies. This
chapter will discuss where the business of General Practice fits in the
broader electronic world and how the use of computerised and internet
based tools and services can enhance patient care and improve
efficiency.

We will include advice on;

-   *NHS Internet connectivity and NHS Net based services*

-   *Practice web sites and internet accessible practice services for
    patients*

-   *Non-practice internet services for patients e.g. patient owned
    records*

-   *On line services for clinicians; peer support, reference and
    education*

-   *Supporting the management of the practice with computers*

-   *Remote working and communicating with patients electronically*

-   *Maintaining and improving internal practice communications*

-   *Guidance on assessing the validity and quality of health
    information from the internet*

-   *Protecting your privacy and security online*

### 11.2 Working in an e-business environment

### 

### 11.2.1 Wired World

When an earlier version of the Good Practice Guidelines was published in
2003, only 47% of UK households had access to the internet. In 2009 this
figure is 70%. Today broadband connections account for over 95% of all
domestic connections, compared to only 11% in 2003. High bandwidth
connectivity to NHS services via N3 is now ubiquitous in general
practice in England and Scotland, and Wales and Northern Ireland have
similar high bandwidth private networks.

In 2009 analysis over a three month period showed that 76% of the UK
population accessed the internet with 73% using it every day. Whilst
communication in the form of e-mail or social networking use comprised
the majority of accesses, 42% used the internet for health information
purposes[^1].

General practice information systems and the users of these systems do
not sit in isolation from the changes that the information technologies
are making at every level of our society. In this chapter we discuss
managing your practice, its records and electronic systems in the wider
world of an on line society.

### 

### 11.3 NHS connectivity

### 

### 11.3.1 The NHS National Network (N3)

### 

The NHS National Network (N3) is a broadband, virtual private network
serving around 1.3 million users in the NHS in England and Scotland[^2].
This network is contracted for by the NHS and for General Practices the
connection is provided at no cost.

Access to N3 from the internet is controlled via a 'gateway' that allows
users on N3 to access the internet and, with appropriate controls, may
allow a user on an external network such as the internet to access N3
services. Gateways are also provided between NHS networks in Wales and
Northern Ireland.

To receive an N3 service practices must agree to the "Information
Governance Statement of Compliance"[^3].

This is a set of rules and guidance around security of and appropriate
use of the N3 network.

N3 is used to support NHS online services such as Choose and Book,
Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions, NHS Mail and the NHS 'Spine'
in England. In addition, N3 can be used to support other network
dependent services such as telemedicine and voice communicating over the
internet (VOIP).

In Wales, Informing Health Care[^4] has provided the Public Sector
Broadband Aggregation Network (PSBA Network) which provides a single
communications network for health, education, local government and other
local services.

### 11.3.2 The NHS 'Spine'

This is a core part of the NHS Care Records Service to support the NHS
in England. While commonly referred to as the 'Spine' it may also be
usefully thought of as a set of national services that underpin other
NHS electronic functions. The Spine provides, for example, the Patient
Demographics Service (PDS) which is used as a source of patient
demographic information such as name, address, date of birth. To access
other NHS Services such as Choose and Book, practices in England must
use PDS details either directly or via a synchronisation process with
local systems.

The spine also provides directory services -- lists of NHS organisations
-- and, at a more technical level, services for managing messaging
transactions between NHS organisations for purposes such as GP2GP and
ETP.

### 11.3.2.1 Smart Cards

NHS England access to spine services requires a role based logon
supported by a 'smart card' and a user pass code or PIN. This identifies
the user to the spine as having particular roles which, in turn,
determines the level of access to functions and data that that user is
allowed.

### 11.3.2.2 Choose and Book

Choose and Book is an online service in England that is intended to
allow practices to refer patients to secondary care and book them an
appointment from the GP surgery.

### 11.3.2.3 Electronic Prescribing

The Electronic Prescribing Service in England is supported by the spine,
which acts as the message broker for the exchange of electronic
prescription messages, and uses the directory service to identify
community pharmacies eligible for the service.

### 11.3.3 Scottish Care Information (SCI)

SCI[^5] provides two main services for practices in Scotland -- SCI
Store and SCI Gateway.

### 11.3.3.1 SCI Store

SCI Store is an information repository primarily used for pathology
results and radiology. Clinicians are able to log on to this service via
an N3 connected web browser and view results for patients with whom
their organisation has had a care relationship.

Interfaces with SCI store are used to provide laboratory messaging into
GP systems in Scotland. However, where agreed locally (e.g. Grampian
region) laboratory reports are sent by structured (EDIFACT) message
using a bounded set of Read-codes, so the results may be filed directly
into the patient's EPR (as for EDI in England -- see chapter 8d).

### 11.3.3.2 SCI Gateway

SCI Gateway is an implementation of an electronic referrals service
although on line booking of the appointment is not routinely available.
It provides directories, referral forms and protocols for local NHS
services and, via integration with primary care information systems,
allows merged data from the GP record to be used in generating the
referral letter. Implementations may also allow for the generated
referral letter to be stored as an attachment to the patient's GP
record.

SCI Gateway technology is also being adopted in Wales and Northern
Ireland.

### 11.3.4 NHS Mail

NHS Mail[^6] is a secure e-mail and directory service for NHS users in
England and Scotland. This has been approved for sending confidential
patient information, but users should be aware that confidentiality only
works when sending e-mails between two 'nhs.net' addresses.

NHS Mail also provides NHS Directory services using a standard protocol
(LDAP) compliant with most e-mail clients. NHS Mail works with a variety
of clients and platforms, including most mobile devices.

### 11.4 Practice web sites and on-line services

### 

### 11.4.1 Web sites

Although there is no contractual obligation for practices to provide a
web site many practices use a web site to inform patients and others
about practice services.

Methods of creating a web site for your practice range from 'do it
yourself', which requires some technical competencies, to contracting
with a specialist web site company for a bespoke site. There are
companies that specialise in providing GP web sites, many of which use a
design template with common content structure for all practices, such as
'Practice Team' and 'Opening Hours', that can be customised to meet
individual customer's needs.

Practices should consider which information they wish the web site to
provide; what the web site address or 'domain' will be and how to
protect their domain names; how to maintain and update the site; whether
the site will contain advertising and if so, how this will be regulated.

Maintenance of content should be possible in house unless you can
guarantee the responsiveness of your web site provider to update
changes. Normally this will require at least one member of staff trained
in using the web site content editor.

Web sites have become increasingly interactive and practices may wish to
think about how the site can be more than a simple information
repository. (For example, provision of an electronic subscription to a
practice newsletter or allowing e-mail inquiries to the practice
manager).

### 11.4.1.1 Registering a domain

Whilst it may be possible to use the inclusive web space often provided
with domestic internet accounts or perhaps a free web hosting service
for this purpose, practices should consider registering an internet
domain name for their practice and contracting with a commercial
provider for web site hosting. This should provide better reliability,
safer backups and makes it easier to transfer the domain hosting in the
future if required.

When registering a domain name it is useful to register as many
variations on the practice name as possible: consider abbreviated forms
of the practice name, as well as more than one domain suffix. Practices
should register the '.nhs' domain. To register a domain with the '.nhs'
suffix refer to this website[^7].

Registering a domain name with commercial companies is relatively easy
and can be achieved using one of many providers, most of which also
provide hosting.

If allowing a web site design company to register domains for you, make
sure ownership of the domain rests with the practice, and not the design
company.

Some PCOs provide practice template web sites hosted from their own web
sites. Ask your PCO if they provide this service.

### 11.4.1.2 Requirements for a General Practice web site;

-   ***Accessible** - For users with partial sight or other disability,
    consider trying to ensure the site is accessible. The Royal National
    Institute for the Blind (RNIB) has useful guidance on this
    subject*[^8]*.*

-   ***Accurate** - Ensure the information provided is correct and up to
    date*

-   ***Cross Platform** - Ensure the site works across all commonly used
    web browsers and also consider how the site will look to users using
    mobile devices such as smart phones.*

-   ***Privacy Statement** - With respect to what data, if any, your
    practice will use from visitor statistics, and especially if any
    interactive services are provided*

-   ***Contact Details** - Ensure a contact e-mail, phone number and
    postal address is provided for queries concerning the web site.*

-   ***Not exclusive** - Information provided on line should reasonably
    be able to be provided in another format for users without internet
    connections. Similarly, the delivery of contractual services to
    patients should never be exclusively provided via an on-line
    service.*

-   ***Appropriate external links** - Links to external sites should be
    tested and considered appropriate by the practice, including any
    advertising. Practices may include a disclaimer to indicate the
    extent of their liability if referring patients to external sites.*

### 11.4.1.3 On Line Appointments

Some GP system suppliers provide on-line booking services to practice
appointment systems. This is most commonly achieved via a web interface
linked to the practice's own website. Methods of implementation include
practices reserving some appointments for web booking, or live booking
of appointments in real time using the practice appointments software.
Automated telephone booking of appointments is also provided by some
companies.

### 11.4.1.4 On Line Prescriptions

Repeat prescription ordering services can also be implemented using a
practice web site. Again, there are a variety of methods of
implementation ranging from simple DIY services using e-mail or 'form to
e-mail', to services integrated with the GP clinical systems.

### 11.4.1.5 Access to records (See also Ch 5)

Some services provide for patients to access all or part of their GP
record on line. This is a complex area, and requires careful
implementation by the practice with respect to data quality, consent,
security controls and workflow safety. See Chapter 5 of these
guidelines.

### 11.4.1.6 Patient Confidentiality

Practices must be careful to ensure that on line access to services for
patients meets requirements for consent and confidentiality. Patients
need to be provided with information about the risks associated with
sending prescription requests by un-encrypted e-mail, and similarly
understand that they have responsibility to ensure their e-mail accounts
and logins are kept secure.

### 11.5 'Consumer' oriented Internet health services

By providing patients with easy access to health information the
internet has changed the doctor patient relationship -- patients are no
longer solely reliant on their doctors to provide all advice and
guidance about their health. Research shows that the majority patients
with internet access will use it to research their symptoms or
conditions[^9]^,^[^10] yet the quality of health information on the
internet is very variable, and patients often require some guidance in
interpreting information they find.

Use of discussion forums and special interest sites for specific
conditions can mean that patients are more abreast of current
developments than their doctors, and the doctor's role becomes one of
placing the patient's expectations and understanding in a context that
is practical to currently available practice and services. Patients
attending their GPs with information from the internet are often a cause
of anxiety for the clinician, challenging their knowledge and
understanding of the condition, their role in managing care and leading
to increased patient expectations.

On line personal health records provide a patient controlled store of
their medical history, and may be useful for the patient when travelling
or consulting with other care providers who may not have access to their
general practice record. NHS HealthSpace[^11] is an NHS England
implementation of this that will also use the Summary Care Record, in
part, to populate it.

### 11.5.1 What makes a good Health web site?

Evaluating the quality and usefulness of Health Web sites for patients
has been attempted formally, and we can identify a number of criteria to
examine, which can help in assessing such sites. Some schemes for
certification of consumer and professional web sites have been made,
such as the "Health on the Net Foundation"[^12] and "The Information
Standard Scheme"[^13]. While reassuring when present, there is no legal
requirement for sites to meet these standards.

### 11.5.1.1 Criteria to evaluate a web site

Evaluating a consumer based health website is similar to evaluating one
aimed at medical professionals, although the emphasis and language may
necessarily differ.

Users should consider:

-   ***Domain** - The address of the website may be helpful it itself.
    The URL should reflect that of the organisation publishing the site.
    '.uk' domains generally mean the site will be aimed at a UK
    audience. '.co.uk' and '.com' suffixes suggest a commercial site,
    whilst '.org' and '.org.uk' are normally used for non commercial
    purposes. *

-   ***Ease of use** - Is the site easy to navigate and easy to read? Is
    the user in control of navigation through the site, or does the site
    open pages without warning, use misleading links or demand payment
    before allowing evaluation of any content?*

-   ***Commercial purposes -** Many useful sites are commercial in
    nature, and others may be funded through advertising. Any adverts
    should be appropriate to the content of the site, inoffensive and,
    ideally, passive requiring the user to follow the link rather than
    forcing the user's attention through popup windows or misleading
    controls and buttons. The funding for the site, and its intended
    purposes, should be clearly stated.*

-   ***Accessible** - Is the site accessible to all users? Are the
    colours, contrasts, fonts and images easy to read and view? Do they
    provide accessibility controls such as font changers or high
    contrast schemes? Providing the site in multiple languages may be
    appropriate where the intended audience may include non English
    speakers.*

-   ***Language** - The level of trust granted to a website will
    increase if the language, grammar and punctuation is largely
    correct, in keeping with the intended audience. Frequent
    miss-spellings or grammatical errors should give rise to caution in
    the reader.*

-   ***Contact details** - Organisations providing health web sites
    should always provide contact details, including a telephone number
    and postal address in addition to any e-mail address.*

-   ***References** - Information provided should be justified with
    direct or indirect references to the source of that information.
    Where references are not provided from the site, an inquiry to the
    contact address should result in the attribution of the information
    being provided.*

-   ***Privacy** - Sites should state their privacy policy and, if they
    collect personal information, should advise users the purposes to
    which this will be put. Users should expect to have control over any
    account with the website, including how much personal information is
    collected, how it will be used and the ability to delete the account
    and associated data if desired.*

-   ***Transparency** - No attempt should be made to conceal the
    ownership or authors of the site's content.*

-   ***Complementary** - The site should provide information and support
    that works with the patient's other health care providers, and does
    not aim to replace them. *

-   ***Useful** - Is the information the site provides of real and
    practical benefit?*

-   ***Authoritative** - Is the providing organisation known to the
    user, and are they known to be a trustworthy source of information.
    For example, users would expect a site provided by the NHS to
    provide authoritative information, but information from an anonymous
    blog publisher would be treated with less trust.*

-   ***Source** - Consider how the site was discovered? References from
    trusted sites would raise the trust level for the viewed site.
    Discovery through a search engine or via an unsolicited e-mail
    should be treated with more caution.*

HoN provides a list of certified web sites, and sites that have passed
HoN accreditation will display the 'HoNcode certification seal' -- a
small image that will link to the HoN site confirming the web site's
status.

The 'Information Standard' scheme is a certification scheme for health
and social care information, currently funded by the Department of
Health. Certified organisations can display the Information Standard's
Quality Mark on their web pages or printed material.

### 11.5.2 Internet Based Personal Health Records

A 'Personal Health Record' (PHR) is a record used and maintained by the
individual to whom it pertains, or by their nominated representative.
The term PHR is not new, but in today's environment generally refers to
an electronic, normally web based, repository for health information.
This differs from the 'Electronic Health Record', a term commonly used
to refer to health care professionals' records for a patient. The PHR is
distinguished from an EHR by the focus of control for access and editing
residing primarily with the patient, not the professional. This
definition becomes less precise as records for patients increasingly
become distributed with the boundaries between EHRs and PHRs, and other
forms of medical record, blurring and intersecting.

Several companies provide PHR services, most notably Google[^14] and
Microsoft[^15]. These services are aimed at the US market, and some US
health insurers now require the use of PHRs by patients as part of the
policy. Such services are clearly commercial, with the providers using
contracts with Health Insurance companies and health related products to
profit from the venture. To do so they must retain the trust of their
consumer market, and thus need to find a balance between health care
requirements and commercial requirements that meets the market's needs.
Health Vault is not available to UK users. Google health allows access
to UK users, but the services it provides are largely US based.

In the UK the NHS in England provides a service called 'HealthSpace',
available to anyone resident in England over 16 years of age[^16].
Described as a 'free, secure online personal health organiser',
HealthSpace can be used by patients to store important medical
information, manage appointments and obtain advice on lifestyle issues.
The service offers an 'Advanced Account' which will allow the user to
view their 'Summary Care Record' details.

How these services will in the longer term impact upon general
practitioners is unclear, although the change in culture that it may
catalyse will again challenge the nature of the doctor patient
relationship.

### 11.5.4 Support Groups and Forums

The internet has allowed the development of communities of users who may
share a health interest or condition. Such forums or support groups are
often accessed via health related web sites[^17] and similar rules to
assessing their validity apply. Many patients may find using a condition
specific health community a useful support to managing their condition,
but there are also risks associated with this. Patients should ask if
the forum they are using is 'moderated', that is: has an administrator
who can edit or remove inappropriate or misleading messages and manage
the forum's subscribers. It may not be easy to identify posters to a
forum, and whilst this 'anonymity' is often part of the appeal it also
makes it easier for those providing misleading information or products
to target sometimes vulnerable people. Informal associations of people
with similar health conditions or concerns can also be enabled on
generic social networking sites such as Facebook.

### 11.5.5 The expert patient

This provision of health care information on the internet with peer
support and health care communities can be very empowering for patients,
but challenging for clinicians who may not have the same level of
expertise in a specific condition, nor the time to acquire it.
Similarly, this leads to conflicts between the scientific, clinical
model of medicine, which underpins most medical training with the
patient's health model, which may be significantly different.

Organisations such as the Expert Patient Programme (EPP)[^18], aim to
assist patients to self manage their conditions, allow them to make
informed choices and work in a complementary way with the clinicians.

GPs may feel anxious when presented with a patient who presents
information about their condition that they have found on the internet.
Suggested reasons for this include fears of being seen as incompetent,
of losing control of the consultation and of feeling devalued. [^19]
Adapting consulting styles to accommodate this, by respecting the
patient's views and providing time to listen to their opinions, can be
useful strategies but the emergence of the expert patient will prove
challenging to conventional models of care delivery in primary care.

The internet provides opportunities for clinicians to direct patients to
appropriate, trusted resources to encourage them to educate themselves
on the management of their condition. An educated patient who is able
and willing to work in partnership with a general practitioner should
benefit the doctor patient relationship and improve care. It is perhaps
part of a GP's role today to educate and inform patients on using health
information from the internet.

Areas to consider and discuss with a patient who provides internet
researched health information include;

-   *What was the source and how was it discovered?*

-   *Is the information correct, accurate and scientifically valid?*

-   *Is the information concise and readable within the time constraints
    of the professional?*

-   *Is any recommended or requested treatment appropriate for the care
    context? That is: for primary care; for the contract of care; for
    the UK?*

-   *Is the treatment licensed and available?*

-   *What does the patient think of the information? Do they trust it?*

-   *How does this information fit with the patient's health model?*

-   *Where there is a previous doctor-patient relationship with the
    patient, how does this new information affect this and can it be
    used within it.*

-   *Are there alternative sources of information that can contradict or
    support the provided views?*

-   *Is the patient willing to listen to alternative viewpoints?*

-   *The information provided may be new to the clinician, valid and
    appropriate. It is important to acknowledge when the patient is
    correct.*

In many ways the challenges provided to doctors dealing with patients
who have sourced information from elsewhere are not new - just more
frequent. The opportunities that arise from being able to educate and
inform patients through internet resources probably outweigh the
disadvantages, but this does demand of clinicians that they accept their
role as the elite custodians of health knowledge has been usurped and
patients are rightly becoming more equal partners in their care.

### 11.6 Using the Internet for consulting

Internet technologies should provide new methods for patients to consult
with their doctors. E-mail, video conferencing and instant messaging are
all relatively new services for communication, which are now widely used
in both business and by the public, but their penetration into health
care service delivery in the UK has been limited.

### 11.6.1 E-mail consulting

Consulting with patients by e-mail has not been widely adopted in UK
general practice to date. The reasons for this are complex, and at first
glance it would seem that e-mail was well suited to the task of
improving communication between patients and clinicians, but several
significant barriers stand in the way of this.[^20]

Practices that are considering using e-mail to allow patients to
communicate with the practice need to consider the risks and benefits
this may incur. Potential benefits arise from the asynchronous nature of
e-mail -- the sender does not require the receiver of the message to be
on line, nor would they expect an instant response; and the messages can
be sent outside of normal working hours. Other proposed benefits
include:

-   *Improving access to those who may be housebound or live in remote
    areas*

-   *The opportunity to include additional information in replies,
    attachments or clickable links to supporting web sites*

-   *A more 'anonymous' medium that may make some patients more
    confident about addressing difficult issues*

-   *Potential efficiencies in time.*

The drawbacks arise from the lack of personal contact and cues --
clinicians are often experienced in consulting in real time using verbal
and non verbal cues, but asynchronous consulting requires a new set of
skills and carries a new set of risks; carries risks to privacy for
patient and clinician; and may result in additional work rather than
changed work.

Practices wishing to use e-mail for patient communication may wish to
consider using it only for clearly defined purposes of limited scope,
such as repeat prescription ordering or the provision of a practice
newsletter. Using e-mail for clinical consulting will require the
practice to address patient authentication to ensure the e-mail address
used belongs to that patient; patient education to improve their
understanding of the risks of sending confidential medical details
unencrypted, and their responsibilities to ensure only they (or trusted
others) have access to the messages. Practices will need to address how
e-mails with patients will be integrated into their clinical record
system, and when. Time must be made available to clinicians to respond
to e-mail queries, and practices must decide if this is to be an
additional service to patients or will replace other methods of
consulting to some degree.

A policy statement should be provided to patients explaining the limits
of the service, such as 'not to be used for emergencies', and this can
be re-iterated using auto-responders from the practice to incoming
e-mails as well as in standard texts sent in replies. Incoming practice
emails should be to a default practice email address rather than named
individuals to cover leave and other absences. Patients should also be
advised that they should be careful of their own privacy for email and
other electronic communications they send and receive about health
matters.

Practices should develop protocols for dealing with unsolicited e-mail
inquiries, which may be from patients or purport to be so. Remember
unless a process has been used to confirm the ownership of an e-mail
address to a specific patient it is impossible to guarantee that the
inquiry is indeed coming from the stated author. A judgement needs to be
made depending on the specific circumstances as to how such inquiries
may be dealt with, but where doubt exists or the information requested
is potentially sensitive caution should be used.

Practices should be aware that all e-mail communications pertaining to a
patient form part of the medical record and, as such, can be requested
for release under the terms of the Data Protection Act.

NHS HealthSpace in England is planning a secure and verified e-mail
channel for patients to communicate with health professionals, thus
managing some of the risks associated with this medium.

### 11.6.2 Voice over Internet Protocol (VOIP) and Video Conferencing

VOIP supports internet telephony services such as Skype[^21]. These
services often also support video conferencing, provided both parties
have 'webcams'.

There is theoretically no reason why practices could not use VOIP
services for telephone communications with patients, but practically it
will be harder to manage and implement. Constraints in bandwidth of the
N3 network would be unlikely to support large numbers of users of VOIP
applications simultaneously, and would have to be negotiated with the
support of a PCO and the N3 provider.

The specific configuration of using VOIP services for practice telephony
is beyond the scope of this document.

Using Video Conferencing technologies to communicate with patients
presents interesting possibilities, but again actual implementations in
the NHS primary care environment will, at this stage, be largely
experimental and may require specific support for network
configurations.

### 11.6.3 Text Messaging

It is possible to use SMS text messaging for some GP services, such as
appointment reminders and results advice. NHS Mail includes an e-mail to
SMS text service and using either bespoke integration, where technical
competencies are available in house, or by purchasing commercial
software it is possible to integrate practice demographic data to use
the NHS Mail SMS gateway for such purposes.

### 11.7 Supporting general practice

### 

### 11.7.1 Education

Revalidation, GP appraisal and re-licensing have increased the
requirements for general practitioners to be able to plan, undertake and
log their learning activities. Various services are available to support
these processes, such as 'Scottish Online Appraisal Resource[^22] the
NHS England Appraisal Toolkit[^23] and information services such as GP
Notebook[^24] provide tracking services to log learning activities.

### 11.7.2 Peer Support

A number of on-line communities for doctors exist in the UK, where
electronic discussion can take place between clinicians.
'Doctors.net.uk' (DNUK) is one of the best known, and is a password
secured site, which requires the user to have a GMC number and matching
name to register. It provides on line forums for discussion across a
wide variety of topics, as well as educational material, job vacancies
and an e-mail service. DNUK is funded through commercial arrangements
with groups and companies "who need to communicate with doctors" and as
such it contains some commercial material such as advertising. Other
mailing lists include 'GP-UK', an ostensibly academic list for GPs
running since 1994[^25], as well as specific mailing lists to support
users of various clinical information systems.

### 11.7.3 Other Software applications

General practices can find benefit it using general commercial software
packages for a variety of purposes in their organisation. Most commonly
used include an 'Office' suite, typically Microsoft Office, which
provides at least a word processer and spreadsheet application for
document writing and data analysis respectively.

Accounts packages can simplify and ease managing the practice's accounts
and specific GP accounting packages are available. Some accountants
require the use of such a package, or will provide a discount to those
practices that do.

### 11.7.4 Intranets

An 'Intranet' is a local information service that uses internet
technologies -- that is, a web browser and web pages -- to provide
information for the local organisation only. Some practices have created
local intranets for storing local protocols and guidance, contact
information, referral forms, calendars and so forth. The NHS provides a
product called 'Digerati', which is an intranet management system that
can be employed in practices at no licensing cost[^26].

### 11.7.5 Messaging

Information technology can be used to support messaging around the
practice, providing for group alerts, informal discussions, clinical
discussions and notifications. Two principle methods are commonly used:
e-mail and instant messaging.

### 11.7.5.1 E-mail

Unless practices have the technical expertise to set up and maintain a
local mail server, and ensure that it is secure within the practice
network boundaries, the recommended approach is to use NHSMail for this
purpose. NHSMail is available in Scotland and England. In Wales the NHS
is rolling out a National e-mail service based on local servers. This
will in due course provide e-mail addresses for NHS Wales staff and
directory services. Plans are also in place to introduce an e-mail to
SMS gateway. Practices should consult with the PCO IM&T department for
advice regarding using their e-mail systems for confidential patient
data prior to employing them for this purpose.

### 11.7.5.2 Instant Messaging

Popup or instant messaging is provided by a variety of companies, some
of which specialise in the primary health care market. This type of
messaging allows for 'chat' client software to receive messages in real
time from other users, may provide an on-line status indication for that
user and other functions such as emergency broadcast messages and
message of the day. Functions to support scheduling, rotas and home
visit management may also be provided.

The use of third party applications for instant messaging, such as MSN
Messenger or Google Talk for internal practice communications carries
risks with respect to confidentiality and the physical location of any
stored data, which may be outside of the UK. Instant messages are
commonly transmitted unencrypted and thus are at risk of 'snooping'
attacks.

### 11.7.5.3 Messages about patients

Every record about a patient in any format, including those used for
messaging in the practice or between NHS organisations is considered
part of the medical record. Practices should ensure that all such
communications are linked to or recorded in the patient's main
electronic record on the clinical information system. Messages and
documents which refer to a patient are legally part of that patient's
medical record and thus liable to disclosure if requested, even if the
document was only intended for internal use or exists only in a draft
format.

### 11.7.6 Teleconferencing

This can be very useful, especially in remote and rural settings for
education CPD; sharing clinical situations, local practice/NHS business
and case conferencing.

### 11.8 Privacy and security in the online world

### 

### 11.8.1 Managing your privacy and protecting your identity

As clinicians increasingly work using electronic records and online
tools and services they have a responsibility to understand how to
manage their online security and identity.

### 11.8.1.1 Logins

Password and username policies vary with different applications and
services. It is tempting to use a single password for all applications
to which users need access, but this policy puts your data at greater
risk if this password is compromised. Aim to have a number of passwords
for different purposes, and a method of changing these when prompted.
Forgetting your password is also a security risk, and for some services,
where the data is of limited use and not patient related, keeping the
password written down, or in a secured or encrypted file may not be
unreasonable.

Do not share passwords with others, and always ensure when using any
system that you log out of it when you are finished. Never use another
person's login name and password for work, which should be attributable
to you. Do not share smart cards.

If leaving your computer terminal for a short period of time, users
should 'lock' the screen and ensure a password is required to regain
access.

### 11.8.1.2 Secure browsing

Modern web browsers have implemented tools to help keep users safe from
fraud by making it clear when the site you are using is 'secure', by
indicating when the site name may be misleading, by controlling software
installation and preventing access to known scam sites. It is important,
therefore, that your web browser is kept up to date and is, ideally, the
most recent version. Constraints on the technology and sometimes
operational requirements have resulted in some desktops provided to
practices by the NHS being restricted to older browsers, or preventing
users installing the browser of their choice.

Users should be aware that they may not be receiving the same level of
protection from fraudulent or deceptive sites at the surgery as they
would normally have elsewhere -- a degree of caution is recommended.

Do not use the facilities on your web browser to store form data or
passwords, especially on shared workstations or use a 'master password'
facility in the browser, if one exists. Ensure you can identify when a
secure connection has been established on the browser (typically the
site will be prefixed with 'https://', but on its own this can be
misleading) before entering any confidential details such as credit card
numbers.

Never follow links in un-solicited e-mails (spam), nor open electronic
attachments from unknown sources.

The PCO should ensure that your workstations are provided with
anti-virus software, and that this is updated and maintained.

If you consider your machine may have been compromised in some way, turn
it off and contact IT support.

### 11.8.1.3 Social networks

Care should be taken when using social networking sites. It is always
inappropriate to use these to discuss identifiable patients and caution
should be used when discussing clinical details in an open forum where
the patient *could* be identified. Similarly, posts to social networks
may be accessible to all and persistent and users should consider
carefully if they are the best place to discuss system or operational
issues, particularly if they pertain to individuals. Inappropriate posts
can result in disciplinary action by professional or contractual bodies
and threaten careers. Although a social network site or peer support
forum may appear to be a friendly place, always consider who else can
read the messages and the implications this may have if taken out of
context.

### 11.8.2 Protecting Electronic Information

Guidance is available from the NHS CFH website[^27] on this topic.

### 11.8.3 Educate users on their responsibilities

The changed nature of the health record as it has migrated to electronic
formats, with a number of different services providing some details
about patients, has blurred the lines between what constitutes
maintaining confidences for today's doctors. It is important when new
electronic record services are introduced and made available to
clinicians that they are educated in their rights of access to these
services and the records they contain, their responsibilities to these
records, the monitoring of compliance that will be employed and the
consequences of failing to meet them.

Maintaining confidence for doctors twenty years ago could be summed up
as 'Don't tell'. Today, given the exposure of records across internet
services clinicians should also remember that 'Don't look' is of equal
importance.

### 11.9 Data extracts

There are a number of services that use extracts from GP system records
to support areas such as unscheduled care, shared care of conditions
such as diabetes, medical and pharmaceutical research and health care
planning (see also Chapter 4.8)

### 11.9.2 What do they do?

Extracts from GP systems have some common features. Generally they all
require some 'middleware', or an implementation that allows the GP
clinical information system to extract the required data in a suitable
format for the receiving service. Normally, they extract a subset of
data on the system, rather than all data. The exact specification of the
subset varies depending on the service and the structure of data in the
GP system. They may have controls for the practice as a whole, and for
individuals or groups of patients to consent, or otherwise, to the data
extraction and for inclusion or exclusion of specific data items. Free
text may be included or excluded. Extractions are often automated, and
scheduled by the software to occur at particular times. The data
extracts may be 'incremental', sending only data which has changed or
been added since the last upload or 'full', always sending the complete
data set.

Once the data has left the practice it is no longer within the bounds of
the practice's data controller to maintain it or control its subsequent
usage, so practices must ensure they understand the uses the data will
be put to, the consent model in use, the functional controls available
in the practice, and have reassurances in the contract or service
agreement with the data extractor that the uses will always be
appropriate to the intended purpose and that the data will be handled
securely.

Some examples include;

-   ### General Practice Research Database (GPRD)

GPRD[^28] is a not for profit research database owned and operated by
the Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). This uses
'anonymised' data from records extracted from GP systems for research by
various public and commercial organisations.

GPRD provides funding for practices to support the data extraction
process, and material for informing patients of the processes and
purposes to which the data is put. Practices receive data quality advice
and reports from GPRD based on their analysis of the received practice
data.

-   ### The Health Improvement Network (THIN)

THIN[^29] is similar to GPRD but only accepts data from users of INPS
Vision. It is operated by a private company, Cegedim Strategic Data.

-   ### Practice Team Information (PTI)

PTI[^30] extracts GP Records from clinical systems in Scotland and
specifically examines workload by analysing face to face consultations.

[^1]: Office for National Statistics, Internet Connectivity December
    2008\
    <http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/intc0209.pdf>

[^2]: <http://www.n3.nhs.uk/>

[^3]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/igsoc/general/>

[^4]: <http://wales.nhs.uk/ihc/>

[^5]: <http://www.sci.scot.nhs.uk/>

[^6]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/nhsmail/>

[^7]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/addressing/webregistration>

[^8]: <http://www.rnib.org.uk/professionals/webaccessibility/>

[^9]: Using the Internet for Health-Related Activities: Findings From a
    National Probability Sample\
    Nancy L Atkinson et al\
    J Med Internet Res 2009;11(1):e4

[^10]: F amily Medicine Patients' Use of the Internet for Health
    Information: A MetroNet Study\
    Kendra L. Schwartz et al\
    *The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine* 19:39-45
    (2006)

[^11]: <https://www.healthspace.nhs.uk/>

[^12]: <http://www.hon.ch>

[^13]: <http://theinformationstandard.org>

[^14]: <https://health.google.com/>

[^15]: <http://www.healthvault.com/>.

[^16]: <https://www.healthspace.nhs.uk>

[^17]: <http://diabetes.org.uk/Get_involved/Online-communities/>

[^18]: <http://www.expertpatients.co.uk/>

[^19]: Br J Gen Pract. 2010 Feb;60(571):88-94. \'A heartbeat moment\':
    qualitative study of GP views of patients bringing health
    information from the internet to a consultation. Ahluwalia S, Murray
    E, Stevenson F, Kerr C, Burns J.

[^20]: INFORMATION IN PRACTICE: Josip Car and Aziz Sheikh. Email
    consultations in health care: 1---scope and effectiveness. BMJ, Aug
    2004; 329: 435 - 438

[^21]: <http://www.skype.com>

[^22]: <http://www.scottishappraisal.scot.nhs.uk/>

[^23]: <https://www.appraisals.nhs.uk/>

[^24]: <http://www.gpnotebook.co.uk>

[^25]: www.jiscmail.ac.uk/lists/gp-uk.html

[^26]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/ssd/prodserv/digerati>

[^27]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/igsoc/general/Protecting.pdf>

[^28]: <http://www.gprd.com/>

[^29]: <http://www.thin-uk.com/>

[^30]: <http://www.isdscotland.org/isd/1044.html>
