Chapter 4 - Records Governance 


### 4.1 Information governance framework 

### 4.1.1 Introduction

The term Information Governance is used to describe the processes, which
ensure the quality, security and appropriate use of information. It is
concerned with the accuracy, accessibility, consistency, and
completeness of information; mechanisms to manage the recording of
information to maintain its provenance and ensure the attribution of
authorship and changes; processes to ensure information is collected
fairly, with informed consent as appropriate and used in a manner
consistent with such consent as far as professional ethics and the law
allows and mechanisms to protect access and ensure the security of
information.

The National Information Governance Board (NIGB) has had prime
responsibility for supporting improvements to information governance
practice in health and social care in England[^1] (though its statutory
functions will eventually be transferred to the Care Quality Commission,
following Cabinet Office review in 2010). The NIGB takes the view that
no system can have zero risk of loss of data through breakdown of
security / confidentiality and that security has to be balanced with the
risk of harm to patients due to either the difficulty of accessing
records or restrictions in working practices; it is a matter of
balancing risks and benefits. They recognise that it is human error,
negligence or dishonesty, and not information management systems, which
primarily put confidentiality at risk. Good practice supported by
training is the foundation of good information governance.

The National Programme for IT (NPfIT) "spine" services such as Choose
and Book and the Electronic Prescription Service use a common approach
to protect the security and confidentiality of every patient\'s personal
and health care details. The NHS has set out the principles that will
govern how patient information is held in the NHS CRS and the way it is
shared. These are outlined in the NHS Care Record Guarantee[^2] and will
be reviewed at least every twelve months as the NHS Care Records Service
develops.

Organisations that need to access these services set up Registration
Authorities to manage this process. The Registration Authority is
responsible for verifying the identity of health care professionals and
workers who wish to register to use these services. Once authorised, the
Registration Authority issues an NHS Smartcard to individuals[^3].
Individuals use their NHS Smartcard and their Smartcard Pass-code each
time they log on.

NHS CRS Smartcards help control who accesses the NHS CRS and what level
of access that they can have. They are similar to a chip and PIN credit
or debit card, but are more secure. A user\'s Smartcard is printed with
their name, photograph and unique user identity number. To register for
a Smartcard, Registration Authorities are required to ask applicants for
identification which satisfies the government recommended standard
\'e-Gif Level 3\', providing at least three forms of ID (photo and
non-photo), including proof of address. Individuals are granted access
to patient information based on their work and level of involvement in
patient care. Staff will also continue to be bound by professional
guidance[^4], local regulations, the Data Protection Act and the NHS
Code of Confidentiality.

Information Governance provides a framework for handling personal
information in a confidential and secure manner to the ethical and
quality standards that are appropriate in a modern health service. There
are a number of tensions (such as the need to balance the requirement
for communication between health professionals against a patient's right
to confidentiality), which render this a complex area, but it is not an
area that health professionals can afford to neglect. Public concern
about the handling of personal information by public sector bodies
remains high and it is essential that robust assurance is provided by
all NHS organisations.

### 4.1.2 Rationale

NHS organisations in general and primary care teams in particular are
increasingly expected to work in close collaboration with other
organisations both within and without the NHS family. It is expected
that NHS organisations will endeavour to ensure that services delivered
are appropriate to the needs of patients and of high quality. This
implies that NHS organisations and other involved bodies should
communicate all relevant information between themselves in order to
ensure that services delivered are both consistent and fully compatible
with patient needs. However, the delivery of services to patients must
remain within the legal, ethical and policy framework. This framework
needs to be understood by all those involved in sharing patient
information.

### 4.1.3 Scope

Information governance encompasses the principles that apply to the
processing and protection of information in whatever form it is
processed or utilised. These principles apply equally to written
records, oral communications and other media (e.g. photographs and
x-rays).

### 4.2 Legal aspects

Important elements of information governance for NHS bodies are derived
from legislation and common law. Some of these elements are clear-cut
but many others need interpretation. NHS service delivery requirements,
an understanding of acceptable ethical practice and applicable
Department of Health policy and standards will all impact on this
interpretation. The relevant areas of law are listed below, with an
indication of the implications of each.

### 4.2.1 Common law duty of confidence

The long established principle that health care professionals have a
duty of confidence to their patients is supported by the common law
(case law established by the Courts). Confidentiality may however be set
aside in the public interest or where statute requires. (A range of
bodies, including the Care Quality Commission, the Audit Commission and
Primary Care Trusts has statutory powers to require disclosure of
confidential information and also disclosures required for notifiable
diseases and under the Abortion Act are examples).

**\
**

**Key attributes:**

Confidential patient information may only be disclosed:

(i) With a patient's consent, or

(ii) Where it is required by law (statutory instrument or Court Order),
    or permitted under S.251 of the NHS Act 2006 or

(iii) Where the public interest served by disclosure outweighs the
    public (and private) interest in protecting the right to
    confidentiality. Disclosures in the public interest must be
    considered on a case-by-case basis.

**Key guidance: **

-   Confidentiality: NHS Code of Practice[^5]

-   GMC Confidentiality: (and supplementary guidance)[^6]

### 4.2.2 Computer Misuse Act 1990

The Computer Misuse Act identifies a range of offences relating to
unauthorised access to or unauthorised modification of computer records.
It may apply where an unauthorised third party accesses information
being transferred.

**Key attributes: **

Where systems are used other than by authorised staff for approved
purposes it is likely to be a criminal offence. It is important that all
staff members are aware of and comply with a documented acceptable use
policy and the security measures put in place to protect all health
records.

**Key guidance:**

Department of Health guidelines

-   Information Security Management: NHS Code of Practice[^7]

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^8]

### 4.2.3 Access to Health Records Act 1990

The Access to Health Records Act[^9] provides the personal
representatives of the deceased or those who have a claim arising from
the patient's death to have access to the health records of the
deceased. The Act allows individuals to add a note to their health
record to negate this access right. Right of access may be partially
excluded in certain circumstances[^10].

**Key attributes:**

Provides the personal representatives of the deceased or those who have
a claim arising from the patient's death to have access to the health
records of deceased patients.

**Key guidance: **

Department of Health guidelines

-   The NHS Confidentiality Code of Practice[^11]

-   Department of Health, patient confidentiality and access to health
    records[^12]

-   GMC Confidentiality (and supplementary guidance)[^13]

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^14]

### 4.2.4 Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA)

The DPA[^15] sets out eight principles to be followed when processing
identifiable information about living individuals. The term 'processing'
includes recording, storage, manipulation and transmission of
information. The Act also identifies both the sensitive nature of health
information and the particular needs of health professionals to
communicate that information between themselves.

The DPA provides patients with a right to have copies made available of
*their own personal data* held in their health records, within the terms
of the Act. The DPA applies to both electronic and paper-based record
systems.

The eight principles are listed below.

[Schedule 1, Part I, paragraph 1 - The data protection
principles]{.underline}

1.  Personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully, and in
    particular shall not be processed unless---

    a.  at least one of the conditions in Schedule 2 is met, and

    b.  In the case of sensitive personal data, at least one of the
        conditions in Schedule 3 is also met.

2.  Personal data shall be obtained only for one or more specified and
    lawful purposes, and shall not be further processed in any manner
    incompatible with that purpose or those purposes.

3.  Personal data shall be adequate, relevant and not excessive in
    relation to the purpose or purposes for which they are processed.

4.  Personal data shall be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to
    date.

5.  Personal data processed for any purpose or purposes shall not be
    kept for longer than is necessary for that purpose or those
    purposes.

6.  Personal data shall be processed in accordance with the rights of
    data subjects under this Act.

7.  Appropriate technical and organisational measures shall be taken
    against unauthorised or unlawful processing of personal data and
    against accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, personal
    data.

8.  Personal data shall not be transferred to a country or territory
    outside the European Economic Area unless that country or territory
    ensures an adequate level of protection for the rights and freedoms
    of data subjects in relation to the processing of personal data.

Other relevant sections of the DPA particularly relevant to the
processing of health data are:

-   Schedule 2, paragraphs 5(c) and (d) and 6 -- personal data

-   Schedule 3, paragraphs 7(1)(c), 8(1)(a) and (b), 8(2) and 10 --
    sensitive personal data

### 4.2.4.1 Data Protection Issues

Data protection legislation restricts the sharing of information between
legal entities without the consent of the data subject and requires that
a data controller is identified for each organisation who has the duty
to ensure compliance with data protection legislation. It is not clear
who the data controller is for shared electronic health records. It
would seem that the data controller of each participating organisation
has a role and the idea of a "data controller in common" has been
proposed, where the data controllers of each participating organisation
have a shared responsibility for the total contents of the shared
electronic health record. However, it is not clear how current
legislation supports it or how it could be organised in practice.

When people use the NHS, they expect a confidential relationship with
the members of the care team they see. But it may be misleading to
discuss this relationship in isolation. Patients expect that a practice
or NHS Trust will take corporate responsibility for their care and to
collaborate with other organisations around a care pathway that provides
a package of complementary elements managed to suit the patient\'s
individual circumstances. This might also reasonably include regulators
and others responsible for detecting unsafe or ineffective
practice[^16].  This creates a tension between the need to share health
data for legitimate corporate reasons and preserving patient
confidentiality.

Patients do not in practice expect everything to come to a stop (until
they consent) at each step when a new individual has to take part in
organising a package of high quality care. They want the high quality
care. There is no contradiction in recognising that they also want an
effective mechanism when some particular information is especially
sensitive and they have a right to object to uses that could be harmful
to them.

The DPA does make the bridge between the health professional\'s duty of
confidentiality and the corporate duty to protect personal information,
which falls on the organisation. The reconciliation of clinical
confidentiality with the corporate duty comes when:

-   *The uses are within the reasonable expectation of the patient,
    given what he/she has been told about the purposes necessary for the
    provision of appropriate care (the \"legitimate interests of the
    data controller\" in this case), and when*

-   *The uses do not prejudice the rights and freedoms or legitimate
    interests of the patient; and when*

-   *The care record can be viewed so that particular people use the
    parts of it they need for their role, and the staff or others who
    use the information for these purposes are bound to keep it
    confidential.*

The care team is not an entity recognised by legislation. Anyone who
uses sensitive information for medical purposes has to be under a
suitable duty of confidence. That is one of the conditions that apply to
the corporate responsibility of a data controller using personal
information relating to a person\'s \"physical or mental health or
condition\".

The concept of locally held data will probably gradually disappear and
there will be a number of data controllers sharing responsibility in
common for each data subject.

The Care Record Guarantee, published by the NIGB[^17] underpins the
relationship between patients and those who will have access to their
NHS records.

**Key attributes:**

The first principle of the Act requires that data are processed
\'fairly\' and \'lawfully\'. This means that patients must be informed
about how and why information about them is used and who will have
access to their information.  It also means that the data must be
processed in accordance with all relevant laws, including the common law
duty of confidentiality, which requires consent for disclosure to third
parties.    

The key principles are that data must be;

-   Obtained for a specified and lawful purpose

-   Not be excessive for the purpose

-   And (for sensitive personal data for medical purposes) must be
    processed by a health professional or an individual with an
    equivalent duty of confidentiality.   

The DPA 'identifies the particular needs' of communication with health
professionals and 'a person who in the circumstances owes a duty of
confidentiality which is equivalent to that which would arise if that
person were a health professional', which may be particularly important
as health and social care become more integrated.

The proper use (and sharing) of sensitive personal information for
medical purposes depends:

-   First on using it to the extent necessary for the purpose, and

-   Second on limiting the use to people who will keep it confidential.

**N.B. The common law duty of confidentiality must be satisfied in order
for confidential information to be processed lawfully under principle
one of the DPA.**

**Key guidance:**

-   Data Protection Act 1998: Further Guidance[^18]

-   The NHS Confidentiality Code of Practice[^19]

-   Department of Health guidance on patient confidentiality and access
    to health records [^20]

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^21]

### 4.2.5 Human Rights Act 1998

The Human Rights Act (HRA)[^22] incorporates the European Convention of
Human Rights into UK law. The Act identifies 15 human rights in Schedule
one and requires 'public authorities' to ensure that their activities do
not violate these rights. GP Practices working within the NHS are public
authorities under the HRA and are therefore required to observe the
Convention rights in their decision-making, and demonstrate that they
have done so.

**Key attributes: **

The Act provides a right to respect for privacy (article eight) that can
only be set aside in accordance with the law when considered necessary
in a democratic state. The advice from government is that this right is
respected fully where the requirements of the Data Protection Act 1998
and the common law duty of confidence are complied with.

**Key guidance:**

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^23]

-   GMC Confidentiality (and supplementary guidance)[^24]

### 4.2.6 Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOI)

The Freedom of Information Act[^25] gives a general right of public
access to information held by public authorities (including GP
Practices). The Act also places a number of obligations on public
authorities. There are a number of exemptions within the Act, which must
be considered before supplying information requested.

The FOI is not intended to allow people to gain access to private
sensitive information about themselves or others, such as information
held in health records. Those wishing to access personal information
about themselves should apply under the DPA. The Information
Commissioner has provided guidance to the effect that health records of
the deceased are exempt from the provisions of FOI due to their
sensitive and confidential content.

There are specific exemptions in the FOI Act to stop disclosure of
personal health information. The following two sections of the FOI Act
are the most relevant:

**Section 40** -- Information which constitutes 'personal information'
under the Data Protection Act 1998 (DPA) is exempt from the provisions
of FOI if its disclosure would contravene any of the DPA principles. The
DPA only applies to living individuals, (However there may be some cases
where information about a deceased patient is also personal information
relating to or identifying a living individual).

**Section 41** -- Information that has been provided in confidence is
exempt from the provisions of the FOI. There is a general agreement that
information provided for the purpose of receiving healthcare is held
under a duty of confidence. This exemption applies with regards to
access to deceased patient records.

**Key attributes: **

Whilst there are a number of exemptions, the main one that will apply in
a primary care setting relates to confidential patient information.
Requests have to be dealt with within 20 working days.

**Key guidance:**

-   Freedom of Information Act -- Freedom of Information Act[^26]

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^27]

-   Guidance for Access to Health Records Requests February 2010, page
    16, para 54 published by DH[^28]

### 4.2.7 The National Health Service Act 2006

Section 251 of the National Health Service Act 2006 (formerly known as
section 60 of the Health and Social Care Act 2001), provides the power
to ensure that in specific circumstances, patient identifiable
information needed to support essential NHS activity can be used without
the consent of patients. The power can only be used to support medical
purposes that are in the interests of patients or the wider public,
where consent is not a practicable alternative and where anonymised
information will not suffice. In effect it sets aside the common law
duty of confidentiality. The Secretary of State for Health is required
to consult with the statutory National Information Governance Board
(Ethics and Confidentiality Commttee) before making any regulations
under section 251 (See also Chapter 4.8.1 below).

**Key attributes: **

The power provided under s251 of the NHS Act 2006 can be used to provide
exemption from the common law duty of confidence requirement for
consent. It provides no exemption from the Data Protection Act 1998. To
date these powers have not been used in a way that would override
patient dissent which must be respected.

**Key guidance:**

-   Department of Health confidentiality website The NHS Confidentiality
    Code of Practice[^29]

-   Department of Health, patient confidentiality and access to health
    records[^30]

-   GMC Confidentiality (and supplementary guidance)[^31]

###  {#section .ListParagraph}

### 4.2.8 Electronic Communications Act 2000

This Act[^32] sets in place an approval scheme for businesses providing
cryptography services, such as electronic signatures and confidentiality
services and the processes under which electronic signatures are
generated, communicated or verified. An NHS order made under the Act
allows for the creation and transmission of prescriptions by electronic
means in cases where specified conditions are met.

**Key attributes: **

An NHS order made under the Act allows for the creation and transmission
of prescriptions by electronic means in cases where specified conditions
are met.

**Key guidance:**

-   NHS Information Governance -- guidance on legal and professional
    obligations[^33]

### 4.2.9 The NHS (General Medical Services Contracts) Regulations 2004[^34], the NHS (Personal Medical Services Agreements) Regulations 2004[^35] and the APMS Directions[^36] 

These Regulations, which came into force in support of the GP contract,
provide Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) with the power to require patient,
and other, information to be provided by practices where this is
necessary in order for PCTs to discharge their responsibilities with
regard to wider functioning of the NHS.

These regulations make explicit existing legal and ethical obligations
of confidentiality, placing them in the context of primary care
contractual arrangements. It does not cover in detail all circumstances
in which contractor-held information may be requested, but sets out
principles of good practice for contractors of primary medical services
and Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) who commission services from them.  It
also describes circumstances in which Strategic Health Authorities
(SHAs) or the Department of Health (DH) may request access to certain
contractor-held information. PCTs are required by Directions to comply
with the provisions of this Code when exercising certain functions. PCTs
should normally seek actively to involve and engage Local Representative
Committees in relation to the Code where there are any potential issues
of contention or where contractors may require additional support.

**Key attributes: **

The Regulations provide PCTs with a right of access to patient records
in an identifiable form for key purposes, without patient consent, where
it is impracticable to anonymise the records or to obtain express
patient consent.

**Key guidance:**

Department of Health publication:

-   Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services (GMS), Personal Medical Services (PMS), and Alternative
    Provider Medical Services (APMS) Code of Practice 2005[^37]

### 

### 4.3 Standards

In addition to the requirements of law, there are a range of standards
that contribute to the information governance framework. An information
standard is a formal document approved and issued by the Information
Standards Board for Health and adult Social Care[^38]. It defines a
technical specification, content, methods, processes and practices for
mandatory implementation across health and social care in England. An
example of an information standard is the use of the NHS Number[^39] in
primary care or the introduction of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) into the NHS[^40].

The General Medical Council is represented on the Information Standards
Board, ensuring that there is appropriate regulatory input before
standards are approved. In addition, the developers of information
standards will be encouraged to have the guidance reviewed by the GPC &
RCGP Joint GP IT Committee.

Information standards will usually be implemented in the IT systems
funded by the Primary Care Trust. It is important to note, however, that
there may be instructions for users contained in the information
standard. These should be followed by GP practice staff to ensure the IT
system is used correctly. The guidance will normally be issued by the
PCT or directly by the supplier. An example would be the guidance that
accompanied the NHS Number standard that the patient is routinely asked
their NHS Number.

**GP practices should therefore act upon guidance issued by the PCT or
suppliers that is endorsed by an information standard. **

###  {#section-2 .ListParagraph}

### 4.3.1 ISO/IEC27001:2005 and ISO/IEC27002:Information Security Standards {#isoiec270012005-and-isoiec27002information-security-standards .ListParagraph}

The NHS has adopted the ISO/IEC 27000 series of international security
standards[^41]. ISO/IEC27001 defines the Information Security Management
System (ISMS) approach to compliance and ISO/IEC27002 describes the code
of practice for information security management and a range of generally
accepted good practice security controls.

Although these standards provide a robust and comprehensive approach to
the management of information security, compliance may be beyond the
resources of many GP Practices. However, it is essential that practices
establish the most secure working practices that they can and key
elements of information security are outlined and supported within the
NHS Information Governance toolkit[^42]. Increasingly network and
database security will not be in the hands of individual GP practices
but important aspects of information security management will remain a
local responsibility.

**Key attributes: **

Information security needs to be based upon an assessment of risk and
covers issues such as access controls, physical security (doors and
locks etc), business continuity planning and disaster recovery, capacity
management, and the storage and disposal of records

**Key guidance: **

-   Information Security Management: NHS Code of Practice

-   [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_074142](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_074142)

-   Information Governance toolkit:

-   nww.igt.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk

    -   (requires an N3 connection for access to downloadable copies of
        the published ISO standards)

-   British Standards Institute
    [www.bsi-global.com/index.xalter](http://www.bsi-global.com/index.xalter)

###  {#section-3 .ListParagraph}

### 4.4 Other relevant publications

### 4.4.1 Caldicott Report 1997

The Caldicott review was commissioned to examine the ways in which
information was used by the NHS. The report[^43] lists 6 principles to
apply to indicate the appropriateness of a proposed communication (see
below).

1.  *Justify the purpose(s) of every proposed use or transfer*

2.  *Don\'t use it unless it is absolutely necessary, and*

3.  *Use the minimum necessary*

4.  *Access to it should be on a strict need-to-know basis*

5.  *Everyone with access to it should be aware of their
    responsibilities, and*

6.  *Understand and comply with the law.*

The report also carries 16 recommendations for changes in communication
processes and practices employed by the NHS.

The recommendations focus on the adoption of a strict 'need to know'
approach to the transmission of identifiable information and the
establishment of an educational and supervisory framework to ensure its
implementation.

Although much of the work recommended by the Caldicott Committee has
been superseded by the NHS Information Governance initiative, the
underlying Caldicott principles and the requirement for senior clinical
involvement in confidentiality management remain highly relevant[^44].

### 4.4.2 Building the Information Core: A Confidentiality Strategy for the NHS[^45]

This document, published in December 2001, set out the Government's
strategic approach to managing the confidentiality of patient
information. The key elements of this strategy now underpin the approach
adopted by NHS CFH. The strategy called for the adoption of a broad
based information governance approach, emphasised the importance now
placed upon informed consent, advocated far greater reliance upon
technology to secure data and proposed a major public awareness
campaign.

### 4.4.3 Confidentiality: NHS Code of Practice[^46]

Published in November 2003 with the endorsement of the Information
Commissioner, the BMA and the General Medical Council (GMC), this
Department of Health publication established an agreed set of guidelines
for the NHS.

The Code of Practice sets out individual and organisational
responsibilities in a clear and coherent way, covering both
confidentiality and aspects of the Data Protection Act 1998. It includes
a decision support tool for disclosure of patient information.

### 

### 4.5 Governance issues particular to shared electronic patient records

The PHCSG[^47] has identified a number of areas that require detailed
examination and guidance that particularly relate to shared electronic
patient record systems. These are discussed below (see also Chapter 5).

### 4.5.1 Data ownership and control

GPs act as data controllers with their patients the data subjects.
Debates about 'who owns the data' occur when a party wants to gain
access to information held in patient records and there is uncertainty
or disagreement about what category of information should be provided,
whether the enquirer has any right of access, whether patient safety
and/or privacy is at risk, or whether patient consent is required. It is
generally more important to resolve these issues than the question of
ownership as such and important to remember that "ownership" does not
give rights of access to or control over personal data.

Clinical responsibility for each aspect of current care should be clear
in a shared record. This might be done by identifying responsibility
against items in a problem list or care plan. Careful consideration also
needs to be given to developing mechanisms which enable the transfer of
such responsibility (these may differ between transfers within an
organisation and transfers between organisations). Patients may wish to
be involved in these decisions (see also Chapter 5.3)

**A community using a shared electronic health record needs to develop
governance rules and processes that ensure the clear allocation of
responsibility and define the rules and mechanisms by which
responsibility can be transferred. **

### 4.5.2 Data and record quality

Maintaining good quality records that are complete, accurate and
up-to-date requires significant effort both in their creation and
ongoing maintenance. Those using records need education and training to
understand the value in making this effort and to equip them with the
skills to do so (see Chapter 5). In General Practice electronic records
have been the norm in most practices for 15-20 years and there is a good
understanding of the value of maintaining record quality, both in terms
of the benefits to patient care and for the health of the practice as a
business. There is considerable concern from general practice that a
shift to shared electronic health records will result in the quality of
the records on which they rely being significantly undermined by users
with a poor understanding of the issues and little motivation to
maintain record quality. The more people that have write access to a
record, the more difficult it becomes to police compliance with good
record keeping practice and to identify individuals with a clear
responsibility for maintaining the quality of the entire record (see
Chapters 5 & 6).

Data migration presents particular hazards in terms of patient safety
and data/record quality. The NHS CfH Clinical Safety Group receive
annually a significant number of safety incident reports relating to
issues encountered during the migration of practices from one clinical
system supplier to another. This is key area of clinical risk.

Typical incidents include:

-   *Reactivation of archived prescriptions *

-   *Mapping errors resulting in different unrelated medications being
    linked (Quinine/Quinadine) *

-   *Issues with preservation of units of measure due to how different
    systems interpret decimal points and so forth (see Chapter 8c).*

### 

### 4.6 Records and record keeping -- guidance from health professional bodies

### 4.6.1 Doctors

The General Medical Council's[^48] (GMC) *Good Medical Practice*
guidance for doctors[^49] makes it clear that patients have a right to
expect that their doctors will hold information about them in
confidence. Confidentiality is central to the trust between patients and
doctors, without which patients may be reluctant to seek medical care or
to disclose information needed to support their care. But appropriate
information sharing is essential to the efficient provision of safe,
effective care, both for the individual patient and to the wider
population of patients[^50].

The GMC requires doctors to make information available to patients about
disclosures of their personal information for purposes of their own
care. In the absence of any objection, patients' consent to information
being shared in this way may be implied. But it is not always clear to
patients that others who support the provision of care might also need
access to their personal information. Patients may not be aware of
disclosures to others for purposes such as health service planning or
research and must be informed about disclosures for purposes they would
not reasonably expect. Doctors must obtain patients' express consent to
disclosure of identifiable information for purposes other than the
provision of care, unless the disclosure is required by law or justified
in the public interest (and wherever possible, patients should be
informed of such disclosures made without consent).

Doctors must make sure that any personal information about patients that
they hold or control is effectively protected against improper
disclosure at all times. Where doctors are responsible for the
management of patient records or other patient information, they must
ensure that it is held securely. Doctors should use their professional
expertise in the selection and development of systems to record, access
and send electronic data. However, doctors are not generally expected to
assess the security standards of large-scale computer systems, provided
for their use by the NHS or other health service providers, but are
expected to understand and adhere to corporate information governance
and confidentiality policies.

Patients may give implied consent to disclosure of personal information
when sharing information in the healthcare team or with others providing
care. Most people understand and accept that information must be shared
within a healthcare team to provide care. Doctors should make
information readily available to patients explaining that their personal
information will be shared within the healthcare team including
administrative and other staff who support the provision of care, unless
they object. This information can be provided in leaflets, posters and
websites as well as face-to-face. Doctors must respect the wishes of any
patient who objects to particular information being shared with others
providing care, except where disclosure is in the public interest or
required by law. Doctors must ensure that anyone to whom they disclose
personal information understands that it is provided in confidence,
which they must respect.

Using live patient records to support the testing of clinical systems is
also considered poor practice unless the patient has been asked and has
specifically consented to this use.

As a general rule, doctors should seek patients' express consent for the
disclosure of identifiable information for purposes other than the
provision of care or local clinical audit.

### 4.6.2 Nurses

The Nursing and Midwifery Council[^51] (NMC) *Guidelines for records and
record keeping*[^52] *(advice sheet)* supports the principle of shared
records in which all members of the health care team involved in the
care and treatment of an individual, make entries in a single record and
in accordance with an agreed local protocol. However, the ability to
obtain information whilst respecting patient and client confidentiality
is regarded as essential. The NMC also emphasises the professional duty
of confidentiality to the patient and states that information from
health records should only be released with the consent of the patient.

### 4.6.3 Allied Health Professionals

The Health Professions Council's[^53] (HPC) publication *Standards of
conduct, performance and ethics*[^54](2008) states that registrants must
treat information about service users as confidential and use it only
for the purposes they have provided it for. Registrants must not
knowingly release any personal or confidential information to anyone who
is not entitled to it, and should check that people who ask for
information are entitled to it. The need to keep proper records is a
professional requirement and records must be protected from being lost,
damaged or accessed by someone without appropriate authority.

### 4.6.4 Summary of guidance

Trust is central to the delivery of healthcare. Patients expect
information about their health to be treated as confidential and only
shared as far as is necessary for the administration and delivery of
their care and for such other purposes for which they have specifically
consented (or where required by law or in the public interest).
Healthcare professionals need to be able to explain to patients how
their data will be used, shared and protected and need to be confident
that promises they make will be respected by the systems they use and
the governance arrangements that control them. If this trust breaks
down, the result is likely to be an increasing reluctance by patients to
share sensitive data and by healthcare professionals to record it, with
consequent clinical risk.

**Overall, the guidance from professional regulatory and representative
bodies clearly supports the sharing of appropriate health information
between health professionals for the process of clinical care and audit.
However, there is also a consistent emphasis on obtaining appropriate
consent and informing patients how their health data may be used.**

### 

### 

### 4.7 Consent

### 4.7.1 Consent and confidentiality

Informed consent transactions are typically used to waive important
ethical, legal and other requirements in limited ways in particular
contexts and for specific purposes[^55]. The duty of confidentiality
seeks to regulate types of action (e.g. communication or disclosure)
rather than the processing of types of data[^56] and is a way of
protecting the content of many types of communications that can only be
waived by seeking consent from the patient.

### 4.7.2 Consent and NHS Care Records

The issue of consent has proved controversial for the NHS particularly
in relation to patient Summary Care Records (SCRs) being uploaded to the
Spine (PSIS) on an implied consent basis and the possible implications
for the confidential relationship between patient and health
professional. The SCR consent model has now been modified to include a
"consent to view" option, following the recommendations of the SCR
evaluation report[^57] (See also Chapter 8e.2 for a more detailed
explanation).

### 4.7.3 Consent and Shared Records

Shared records are derived from the detailed care records of those
patients attending particular healthcare organisations and requiring
some form of healthcare. These patients are likely to be actively
receiving services from one or more healthcare organisations and it may
be that such patients could benefit from having a shared record to
facilitate communication between those organisations providing care and
the patient.

Patients will generally expect to have a health record kept by each
organisation they attend and it is a professional requirement that such
records are made. Healthcare teams, involved in a patient\'s care, can
access the healthcare records within their local organisation provided
the patient has not objected to this.  Such consent is implied as part
of consent to treatment.  Patents may understand that personal health
information will be shared (communicated) between different healthcare
professional groups and organisations to facilitate that patient's care.
Accessing communicated information such as referral letters, reports and
laboratory tests is also usually done on an implied consent basis
amongst the healthcare team providing care to the patient. Most of the
"rules" governing such professional behaviours have developed through
custom and practice within a national legal, ethical and moral
framework.

In some areas, explicit data sharing agreements are being developed
which go some way to addressing the shared record issues highlighted
here (and in Chapter 5). However, this is an area still in its infancy
and we are not yet able to offer any guidance here (while acknowledging
that this will need to be addressed).

### 4.7.4 Consent, confidentiality and trust

Trust underpins the confidential relationship between patients and
health professionals and cannot be replaced by other systems of
accountability, including electronic systems. Deciding what information
might and might not be disclosed in a shared record depends
fundamentally on the relationships between patients and their health
professionals.

### 4.8 Information governance and data disclosure

There is a growing demand in the NHS and beyond for practices to
disclose clinical information from patient records to support clinical
care, audit, health service planning and research. GPs have a
responsibility, determined in law and professional standards to
safeguard the confidentiality of the patient records that they control,
whether it is stored on a practice server or hosted in a data centre.
Practices should have a senior member of the practice who acts as
Caldicott Guardian[^58] and is able to give advice when there is doubt
about the best way to respond to a request for data disclosure.

The request may be for information from the paper or computer records,
about a single named patient or a group of patients' records. The output
is increasingly provided by the practice in the form of a data
extraction produced by a computer query. Extractions must comply with
the guidelines and the standards laid out by the relevant regulatory
bodies[^59][^60][^61] including data quality and integrity standards
described elsewhere in these guidelines (see Chapter 6).

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4.8 - The decision to disclose**                             |
+=======================================================================+
| As the practice is the data controller for patient records that they  |
| hold, they are responsible for every data disclosure and can refuse a |
| request that they do not agree with, although that agreement should   |
| not be unreasonably withheld. In making their decision it will help   |
| the practice to take a number of questions into consideration:        |
|                                                                       |
| *Note: the terms used in this box are defined in the body of the      |
| text.*                                                                |
|                                                                       |
| 1.  Is there a statutory, court order or other requirement for        |
|     disclosure?                                                       |
|                                                                       |
| 2.  Is patient consent required for the data to be disclosed?         |
|                                                                       |
| 3.  If data disclosure is requested without patient consent on the    |
|     grounds that the data extracted will be effectively anonymised or |
|     pseudonymised, are you confident that the data will not be        |
|     identifiable?                                                     |
|                                                                       |
| 4.  If a third party offers to ensure effective anonymisation or      |
|     pseudonymisation of the data after the data has left the          |
|     practice, can they be trusted? (Is this a "safe haven"?). Do they |
|     have S251 approval? (see Chapter 4.8.1. below)                    |
|                                                                       |
| 5.  Will only the minimum necessary data be extracted and disclosed   |
|     and will it exclude any information that is specifically          |
|     protected at the patient's request?                               |
|                                                                       |
| 6.  Are the proposed use and protection of the disclosed data by the  |
|     recipient clear and acceptable and will the data be deleted when  |
|     the purpose of the extraction is achieved?                        |
|                                                                       |
| 7.  Will the data be transferred, stored and processed securely?      |
|                                                                       |
| The practice should also make a judgement about whether:              |
|                                                                       |
| 8.  The data to be disclosed is accurate and complete enough for the  |
|     purpose of the extraction                                         |
|                                                                       |
| 9.  A record of the data disclosed and the date it was extracted      |
|     should be retained by the practice?                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

###  4.8.1 Statutory and common law requirements to disclose data

Disclosure of confidential data generally requires the consent of the
patient but there are statutory justifications for the disclosure of
patient-identifiable information without consent[^62][^63]. Examples
include the notification of communicable diseases[^64] and the existence
of a court order demanding disclosure. Public interest is another
justification but the threshold for this is high in some circumstances,
for example the prevention of serious harm or serious
crime[^65][^66][^67][^68]. The final decision about whether disclosure
is appropriate lies with the data controller, in this case the practice.
Disclosures for research and health service planning are also reasonable
and examples of where the threshold for disclosure is not so high. The
GMC provides excellent guidance on these issues[^69].

In certain circumstances GPs are contractually required to provide
patient identifiable data to PCTs without consent where it is not
feasible to anonymise the data or gain patient consent[^70] [^71].

**Section 251 of the NHS Act (2006)** operates in England and Wales and
allows the common law duty of confidentiality "to be set aside in
specific circumstances for medical purposes", where it is not possible
to use anonymised information and it is not practicable to seek
individual consent. The goal must be in the public interest[^72] and
when the data are to be used for research, the research must have
approval of a research ethics committee[^73]. Applications to use
Section 251 in England are considered by the Ethics and Confidentiality
Committee of the National Information Governance Board (NIGB)[^74]
[^75]. If the practice receives a request for data under Section 251, it
is acceptable to disclose identifiable data without patient consent but
it is good practice to inform the individuals involved as soon as
possible[^76]. The final decision about whether to disclose the data
rests with the practice[^77] [^78].

### 4.8.2 Patient consent

Consent from the patient is normally required if confidential data are
to be disclosed for purposes other than the provision of care. The GMC,
the BMA and the MDOs offer guidance on consent to disclose records of
individuals under the age of 16[^79] [^80] or adults lacking capacity to
give consent[^81] [^82].

**Express consent** is given orally or in writing by a person who is
fully informed about the purpose and nature of the data that is to be
disclosed[^83]. Unless there is some other legal justification (see
above), it is needed for disclosure of identifiable data that is not for
direct patient care[^84] [^85] [^86] -- that is quadrant A in the
diagram below (typically called "secondary uses"[^87] [^88]). Common
secondary uses for data extracted by queries run against the practice
patient database are; health care planning, commissioning of health
services, research, education and training. Express consent or dissent
should normally be recorded in the patient's record. If consent is
provided in the form of a signed consent form or letter, it should be
stored in the patient's record, where possible, as a scanned document
attached to the electronic record.

The GMC confirms that it is reasonable to accept an assurance from an
officer of a government department or agency or a registered health
professional acting on their behalf that the patient or a person
properly authorised to act on their behalf has consented[^89] [^90].

If the practice computer system supports access restrictions on specific
elements of patients' records, such patient choices should be complied
with in the extraction[^91].

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ### Figure 4.8.2 - The nature and |                                   |
|  uses of data extracts {#figure-4 |                                   |
| .8.2---the-nature-and-uses-of-dat |                                   |
| a-extracts}                       |                                   |
+===================================+===================================+
| **A** Patient identifiable\       | **B** Patient identifiable\       |
| *data for*\                       | *data for*\                       |
| Secondary uses                    | Direct patient care               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **D** Effectively anonymised      | **C** Effectively anonymised      |
| *data for*\                       | *data for*\                       |
| Secondary uses                    | Direct patient care               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Express consent is required in    |                                   |
| quadrant A. Implied consent is    |                                   |
| appropriate for quadrant B. No    |                                   |
| consent is required in law for    |                                   |
| data in quadrant C or D.          |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

**Implied consent** is considered to be acceptable when identifiable
information is shared with the health care team or others providing
care, including administrative staff, for the purpose of provision of
care to the identified patient(s) or it is used for clinical audit by
the team providing health care (Quadrant B)[^92]. Consent is inferred if
the patient can be expected to understand that information will be
disclosed for these purposes, the extent of the disclosure and their
right to opt out, but they have not objected to the disclosure. If the
data are to be processed fairly[^93] the information should be made
available in a number of ways. Methods of informing patients include
posters and standard information leaflets, face to face discussion in
the course of a consultation, information included in an appointment
letter from a hospital or clinic and a letter sent to each patient's
home. The Summary Care Record and local sharing of the Detailed Care
Record are special examples that are discussed elsewhere in this
chapter.

Express consent is not required for the disclosure of data when it is
effectively anonymised (see 4.8.3 below) The Department of Health (DH)
and the General Medical Council (GMC) advise that there is no legal
requirement for consent or for patients to have an option to refuse
consent to the use of effectively anonymised data from their records for
direct patient care (Quadrant C) or other uses (Quadrant D)[^94] [^95].
The former is unusual, most commonly local clinical audit. Secondary
uses are more common. The Quality and Outcomes Framework[^96] [^97],
local health service planning[^98] and research[^99] are examples. Some
members of the public hold strong views that patients should be able to
refuse consent for their information to be used even in anonymised
form[^100].

### 4.8.3 Patient identifiable data and effective anonymisation

Every request for data disclosure should include a full explanation of
the use for the data and the purpose of the disclosure. It should also
be very clear whether the data extracted may be linked to individual
patients. The GMC Confidentiality guidance provides definitions for
anonymised, coded information and identifiable information.[^101]

**Anonymised information** -- Information from which individuals cannot
reasonably be identified. Names, addresses, full postcodes or
identification numbers, alone or together or in conjunction with any
other information held by or available to the recipient, can be used to
identify patients.

**Coded information --** Also known as pseudonymised information.
Information from which individuals cannot be identified by the
recipient, but which enables information about different patients to be
distinguished or to link information about the same patients over time
(for example to identify drug side effects). A key might be retained by
the person or service which coded the information so that it can be
reconnected with the patient.

**Identifiable information** - information from which a patient can be
identified. Their name, address and full postcode will identify a
patient; combinations of information may also do so, even if their name
and address are not included. Information consisting of small numbers
and rare conditions might also lead to the identification of an
individual.

There are a variety of techniques that can be used, singly or in
combination, to make it less likely that individuals can be recognised
from the data.

Data extraction from patients' records is likely to be identifiable
after it has been disclosed if:

-   *It contains identifiers such as name and address, full post code,
    date of birth or death, NHS number, a local identifier such as a
    practice computer system ID number, sex, ethnic origin or
    occupation*[^102]*,*

It could possibly be identifiable if:

-   *It contains a combination of unusual features that generate small
    numbers of patients, allowing a specific patient's data to be
    identified. Even if a query extracts data from a large number of
    patients, it may be that only a small number of them share certain
    features, which allow their identity to be inferred. *

*Care should be taken to ensure that the recipient of data does not have
other knowledge that might allow them to infer the identity of
individuals from the data. Data should also be checked to ensure that it
does not contain free text entries which may directly name the patient
or a third party relating to the patient. Where free text is present, it
should either be removed or read by a responsible person to exclude
specific patient-identifiable material.*

A patient's identity is less likely to be at risk and the extracted data
more likely to be effectively anonymised if it is only going to be used
in controlled circumstances by a small group of users governed by an
employment contract and a legal duty of confidentiality than if the data
are to be published on a website.

Data can be transformed after it has been extracted in order to make it
less likely that individuals can be recognised from it. This may best be
done in a safe haven: a physical or electronic infrastructure that
provides a high level of security and governance controls for
confidential data to be processed securely. People working in safe
havens should be bound by an equivalent code of conduct preventing
disclosure of data as health professionals[^103] [^104] [^105] [^106].

Ways of transforming extracted data to make it less likely that
individuals can be recognised include:

1.  **Removal all the person identifiers.**

2.  **Pseudonymisation** - also known as coding, is a process of
    replacing person identifiers with other values (pseudonyms)
    available to the data user, from which the identities of the
    individuals cannot be intrinsically inferred[^107] [^108]. It
    maintains the anonymity of extracted data while allowing the records
    about the same individual to be linked using the same unique label
    or key, often created using encryption processes, for each
    extraction from an individual's record. The process may be carried
    out by the GP computer system or by a third party immediately after
    extraction.

> Pseudonymisation has two weaknesses: the possibility of successfully
> identifying patients from the rest of the data remains and access to
> the key or lookup tables used to pseudonymise the data allows the
> process to be reversed to identify the data subjects. Thus the
> governance around the pseudonymisation process and transparency about
> when and how the pseudonymisation may be legitimately reversed are
> very important.
>
> Some data extraction services[^109] [^110] use a "two key process"
> whereby an encrypted key is added to each record before the data
> leaves the practice and the first recipient adds a second key before
> the data are used by third parties.

3.  **Aggregating** **data** - so that category totals are displayed
    instead of individual record values. This can be combined with small
    number processing: extracted data that is to be published should be
    checked to ensure that cells containing small numbers (usually less
    than 5) are changed or deleted before the data are disclosed.

4.  **Using derivations or banding** - hides the exact original values,
    e.g. replacing dates of birth by ages, addresses by localities,
    using partial postcodes.

5.  **Shuffling** -- creates synthetic data. The data items are shuffled
    so that the totals and values in the data set are preserved but the
    links to identifiers are irreversibly broken.

This may be done in the practice or after the data has been extracted
and released to a trusted third party who, working in a safe haven, will
use software that requires no user to view the data[^111] [^112].

### 4.8.4 Practice responsibility for the data to be extracted

The practice should have the opportunity to review the data before it
leaves the practice. This means that where the data extraction is
controlled by an agency outside the practice there should be a period
between running the query on the GP system and the disclosure of the
data. It should be enough to allow the practice to check the following:

**Inaccurate or incomplete data** - can be misleading or affect the
results of research, commissioning or other secondary purposes. Finding
significant errors or omissions in the records may lead the practice to
correct the data in the affected patients' records but also look at any
systematic problems within practice processes that are leading to the
errors.

**Minimum dataset** - the practice can confirm that only the minimum
data required for the express purpose of the disclosure has been
extracted. Ideally the data requestor should explain the requirement for
every field of data in the extracted data.

**Patient withheld data** - if the practice clinical computer system
supports a method of withholding patient information and a patient has
asked for information to be hidden, that data should not be extracted in
identifiable form.

**Third party data** - data may contain information that is confidential
to another person. Information about genetic tests or illnesses may
point to the illness or likelihood of the same illness in a blood
relative[^113].

### 4.8.5 Disclosure after a patient's death

In general the duty of confidence continues after a patient has
died[^114]. The GMC gives advice on circumstances where relevant
information about a patient who has died should be disclosed[^115].
Examples include data extraction authorised under section 251 of the NHS
Act 2006 or justified in the public interest, such as research, for
National Confidential Inquiries or local clinical audit. Where possible
the data should be anonymised or coded.

It is safest to treat confidential information about dead people in the
same way as you treat such information about living people. If you are
aware that a patient asked for their information to remain confidential,
their wishes should usually be respected. If you are unaware of the
patient's wishes, the GMC guidance is to consider whether disclosure is
likely to cause distress or benefit to the patient's partner or family,
disclose information about the patient's family or anyone else, whether
it is already public knowledge and the purpose of the disclosure.

### 4.8.6 Data leaving the practice

**Data transmission** - the practice has a responsibility to ensure that
all data extracted from the patents' records are processed
securely[^116]. This includes making sure that the data leaves the
practice securely. If it is to be carried on removable media such as USB
memory devices or CD-ROMs, the data must be encrypted (and the key sent
separately). If it is to be transmitted electronically, such
transmissions must be secure. Once the data leaves the practice, the
recipient may take over the responsibility of data controller for the
data they hold, depending upon their use of the data.

**Data recipients**- where the data recipient becomes the data
controller for the data, they will assume legal responsibility for
holding and processing it securely. That includes following the key
principles of the Data Protection Act (1998)[^117] for identifiable
data. In particular they should only use identifiable data for the
purposes for which it has been extracted and it should be deleted as
soon as that purpose is complete. It is helpful for the practice to have
a clear written agreement with the requestor of the data that states
exactly how they will manage the data after it leaves the practice.

The practice should assure itself that the data recipient understands,
and can be expected to meet, its legal responsibilities in relation to
the data. It is reasonable for GPs to assume that a national government
organisation will handle such data correctly[^118]. Other recipients may
have trusted third party status and their data management handling may
be accredited to recognised standards such as ISO 27001 and 27002. The
government in their response to the Data Sharing Review accepted the
notion of the approved researcher, who works under the same duty of
confidentiality as health professionals[^119] [^120].

### 4.9 Retention of GP electronic patient records and associated audit trails when a patient is no longer registered with a practice

### 4.9.1 Background

An agreement was reached between the BMA and the OIC in 2004 to the
effect that GP electronic patient records and their associated system
audit trails should be retained by practices indefinitely pending the
development of functionality to support transfer of GP EPRs and their
associated audit trails between systems in a way that would enable both
to be integrated into the receiving system. However, it has become clear
that the functionality to transfer and integrate audit trails will not
be available for the foreseeable future.

A second issue that requires clarification relates to the patient record
transfer terminology. The term "GP2GP transfer" is misleading, as it is
a **copy** of the record that is sent, not the record itself.

The OIC has made it clear that there can be no exemption to the
requirement for GPs to comply with the Principles of the DPA and
particularly in this context with the principles relating to not
retaining records for longer than necessary and ensuring that retained
records are protected by appropriate security measures. The retention of
audit trails and patient records by a practice that is no longer caring
for the individual concerned must be for appropriate and necessary
purposes. In the absence of a lawful basis for retaining these records
they should be physically deleted from systems. If there is a lawful
basis for retaining records they should be protected by security
measures that prevent them from being accessed inappropriately.

The Department of Health, RCGP and BMA believe that there are a number
of purposes (see also Table 4.9 below) for which it is necessary to
retain and access patient records when a patient is no longer registered
with a practice. These considerations apply only where a patient leaving
a practice subsequently requires a copy of a record to be sent between
systems or locations. Different considerations will apply where a
patient moves between practices that use the same remotely hosted system
(e.g. TPP SystmOne) where the transfer is affected by simple access
control adjustments and there is no interruption in the audit trail.

### 4.9.2 Clinical purposes

Patients have a tendency to return to practices. Although most returns
will probably be after short periods of a few years (e.g. on returning
from University) some will be later. The GP2GP project is working on a
Version 2 message that depends on the \'old\' record plus its audit
trail remaining intact in the original practice. That will allow the
returning record to be safely merged with the old (existing) record
without duplication or unnecessary degradation or disorganisation. (In
this context "degradation" refers to the inability of some code terms to
be safely mapped from one clinical system to another -- see chapter
8b.2)

This is important from a patient safety point of view, as there is a
tendency for the structure of a record to be degraded by passage through
successive different systems. Therefore, when the patient returns to
Practice A, that part of the record that originally started out from
Practice A will have undergone some degradations and disorganisation as
it went through Practices B and C. By adopting the new Version 2 GP2GP
solution it will be possible for Practice A simply to reactivate its old
record and only to import subsequent additions and amendments. That
should result in a better quality record at Practice A - making the
record more usable and also safer.

### 4.9.3 Medico-legal purposes

Providing medico-legal evidence (e.g. to establish or refute negligence
or poor performance) is an essential purpose of record audit trails.
Poor clinical performance can only be evidenced in many cases by a
review of the records made during an episode of care. Errors or delays
in diagnosis, the use of outmoded tests or treatments and failure to act
on the results of monitoring or testing can be established or refuted
through well-maintained records and their associated audit trails.

Audit trails are physically separate chronological records held
alongside the patient EPR and provide a record of the activities of
system users and of changes to systems themselves. This record includes,
but is not limited to, additions and amendments to patient records and
by rolling back all changes it is possible to understand what a record
looked like at a particular point in time, what changes were
subsequently made and who made them.

Audit trails are the primary tool for supporting forensic analysis and
establishing evidence about what was recorded when and by whom. They are
tamper proof and intentionally have no functionality to support
deletions or amendments, as these would defeat their purpose. It is not
therefore possible to specify the components of an audit trail relating
to a specific patient record in order, for example, to delete
references. The only way to remove a record from an audit trail is to
wipe the media holding the entire audit trail clean.

The audit trail in GP clinical systems is specific to each individual
system and it cannot be meaningfully interpreted by a different system.
It is not therefore transferred between GP systems by electronic message
or copied between systems, as is the content of the patient record
itself. Crucially, the audit trail retains its usefulness only so long
as it can be associated with the system and the records it relates to.
Physical deletion of an EPR would render the associated audit trail
meaningless.

**It is therefore essential that both the audit trail and the patient
record that it is associated with must be retained by a Practice even
when a patient is no longer registered with that Practice.**

DH lawyers advise that although there is technically a time limit in
respect of litigation resulting from clinical negligence, there are a
number of exceptions or special circumstances which mean that this
cannot be relied upon, and litigation can arise many years after the
event and therefore that the evidence needed to determine what changes
were made to records, by whom and at what point in time must be retained
indefinitely. It is therefore necessary that both the audit trail and
the associated patient record be retained indefinitely by a practice, as
they are the sole source of forensic evidence.

**Access controls should however prevent access to the patient record
once a patient has left the practice unless there is an appropriate and
necessary purpose and there should be robust governance processes to
ensure that this is managed effectively. **

### 4.9.4 Probity purposes

Health records also provide the main, and some times sole, evidence of
work undertaken by a practice and are required to support claims for
payment and bids for resources, both by the practice but also by
organisations from which care was commissioned for patients. The
financial systems require practices to retain the evidence to support
claimed payments for up to 8 years and the process of ensuring that
payments made through the commissioning process can also take
considerable time to resolve.

### 4.9.5 Clinical governance purposes

There are also important clinical governance activities that require
records to be available and checked and failure to include patients who
have left the practice may bias reviews or obscure important evidence
(why did the patient leave?). Activity to support professional appraisal
and revalidation also needs to include all of a doctor's recent caseload
and again it would potentially undermine the process if a proportion of
patients records weren't available for review -- some practices have
patient turn over of 30%+ each year.

### 4.9.6 Other purposes

Although not in itself a purpose that would justify record retention,
the fact that records are being retained for other reasons also means
that it is necessary for practices to meet the requirements relating to
subject access to retained health records.

It is also likely that access to records will be sought by research
interests e.g. UK Biobank and where appropriate authorisation is
provided, e.g. explicit patient consent, then access may be required. In
many cases this will be achieved through software solutions, e.g. GPES
(the General Practice Extraction Service) provided by the Health &
Social Care Information Centre.

### 4.9.7 Access controls

Although the purposes identified above require records and associated
audit trails to be retained indefinitely, different staff will require
access for these purposes and some purposes will no longer be valid
after certain periods requiring changes to be made to the access rights
of these staff.

**Table 4.9**

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Purpose**           | **Staff Roles         | **Access Required     |
|                       | Requiring Access**    | for...**              |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| Subsequent Clinical   | Only designated staff | Indefinitely          |
| Care                  | involved in patient   |                       |
|                       | registration/re-regis |                       |
|                       | tration               |                       |
|                       | procedures            |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Practice Management,  | All staff whose roles | Three months          |
| completing/updating   | involve record access |                       |
| records               | for registered        |                       |
|                       | patients              |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Medico Legal &        | **Only designated     | Indefinitely          |
| Subject               | clinical and          |                       |
|                       | administrative staff. |                       |
|                       | **                    |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | **Different staff may |                       |
|                       | be designated for the |                       |
|                       | different purposes**  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Probity               |                       | Eight years           |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Clinical governance   |                       | Five years            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

### 4.10 The Information Governance Toolkit, & Information Governance Statement of Compliance (IGSoC)

All organisations that provide or support the provision of NHS services
need to provide assurance that they have robust information governance
and are managing patient records confidentially and securely. This is a
requirement set out in the NHS Constitution[^121] and in the NHS Care
Record Guarantee[^122] and also underpins the registration requirements
overseen by the Care Quality Commission.

This assurance is provided by organizations completing a performance
assessment using the NHS Information Governance Toolkit[^123] and by
working to make year on year improvements in their performance. The NHS
Information Governance Toolkit performance assessment also provides
assurance that an organisation is addressing its responsibilities as a
user of national IT applications and services (e.g. N3, NHSmail etc)
through an additional assurance statement (also referred to as the IG
Statement of Compliance - IGSoC) that organisations need to sign
annually.

Access to national IT applications and services is not a right, and
assurance is needed from organisations connecting to the NHS IT
infrastructure, to the effect that they will follow good information
governance practice and not put national networks knowingly at risk.

[^1]: National Information Governance Board
    [www.nigb.nhs.uk](http://www.nigb.nhs.uk)

[^2]: Care Record Guarantee
    [www.nigb.nhs.uk/guarantee](http://www.nigb.nhs.uk/guarantee)

[^3]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/rasmartcards>

[^4]: GMC <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/>

[^5]: <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/DH_4100550>

[^6]: GMC Confidentiality
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^7]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_074142](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_074142)

[^8]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^9]: Access to Health Records Act 1990
    [www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1990/Ukpga\_19900023\_en\_1.htm](http://www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1990/Ukpga_19900023_en_1.htm)

[^10]: <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/23/section/5>

[^11]: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/DH\_4100550

[^12]: [www.dh.gov.uk/PolicyAndGuidance/InformationPolicy/PatientConfidentialityAndCaldicottGuardians/fs/en](http://www.dh.gov.uk/PolicyAndGuidance/InformationPolicy/PatientConfidentialityAndCaldicottGuardians/fs/en)

[^13]: GMC Confidentiality
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^14]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^15]: Data Protection Act 1998
    [www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1998/19980029.htm](http://www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1998/19980029.htm)

[^16]: HSJ
    http://www.hsj.co.uk/news/acute-care/mid-staffordshire-crisis-quality-of-care-sacrificed-in-ft-bid/2007558.article

[^17]: Care Record Guarantee [www.nigb.nhs.uk](http://www.nigb.nhs.uk)

[^18]: [www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk](http://www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk)

[^19]: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/DH\_4100550

[^20]: <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/index.htm>

[^21]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^22]: Human Rights Act
    [www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1998/19980042.htm](http://www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts1998/19980042.htm)

[^23]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^24]: GMC Confidentiality
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^25]: Freedom of Information Act
    [www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/20000036.htm](http://www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/20000036.htm)

[^26]: www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk

[^27]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^28]: <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_112916>

[^29]: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/DH\_4100550

[^30]: [www.dh.gov.uk/PolicyAndGuidance/InformationPolicy/PatientConfidentialityAndCaldicottGuardians/fs/en](http://www.dh.gov.uk/PolicyAndGuidance/InformationPolicy/PatientConfidentialityAndCaldicottGuardians/fs/en)

[^31]: GMC Confidentiality
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^32]: Electronic Communications Act 2000 [Electronic Communications Act
    2000 (c.
    7)](http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/ukpga_20000007_en_1)

[^33]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh\_079616](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguidance/dh_079616)

[^34]: S.I. 2004/291

[^35]: S.I. 2004/627

[^36]: The Alternative Provider Medical Services Directions 2004 dated
    21st April 2004.

[^37]: [www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyandGuidance/DH\_4107303](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyandGuidance/DH_4107303)

[^38]: Information Standards Board for Health & Social Care
    <http://www.isb.nhs.uk/>

[^39]: NHS Number Program
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/nhsnumber/>

[^40]: ICD 10
    <http://www.datadictionary.nhs.uk/web_site_content/supporting_information/clinical_coding/international_classification_of_diseases_%28icd-10%29.asp?shownav=1>

[^41]: This series has replaced and extended the BS7799-2:2002 and
    BS7799-1, previously known internationally as ISO17799:2000

[^42]: IGT <https://www.igt.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/>

[^43]: The Caldicott Report
    [www.dh.gov.uk/PublicationsAndStatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidanceArticle/fs/en?CONTENT\_ID=4068403&chk=jsKw07](http://www.dh.gov.uk/PublicationsAndStatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidanceArticle/fs/en?CONTENT_ID=4068403&chk=jsKw07)

[^44]: Caldicott Manual 2010
    <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_114509>

[^45]: Building the Information Core A Confidentiality Strategy for the
    NHS

[^46]: Confidentiality: NHS Code of Practice [The NHS Confidentiality
    Code of
    Practice](http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Informationpolicy/Patientconfidentialityandcaldicottguardians/DH_4100550)

[^47]: PHCSG (BCS) CLICSIG conference, 31 January 2009.

[^48]: <http://www.gmc-uk.org/>

[^49]: General Medical Council Good Medical Practice (2006)
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/good_medical_practice/duties_of_a_doctor.asp>

[^50]: General Medical Council Confidentiality Guidance (2009)

[^51]: <http://www.nmc-uk.org/>

[^52]: Nursing and Midwifery Council. Guidelines for records and record
    keeping - Record keeping advice sheet.

    <http://www.nmc-uk.org/aFrameDisplay.aspx?DocumentID=4008>

[^53]: <http://www.hpc-uk.org/>

[^54]: <http://www.hpc-uk.org/publications/standards/index.asp?id=38>

[^55]: Rethinking Informed Consent in Bioethics. Neil C Manson and Onora
    O'Neill, p72. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge 2007.

[^56]: Rethinking Informed Consent in Bioethics. Neil C Manson and Onora
    O'Neill, p126. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge 2007.

[^57]: UCL SCR Independent Evaluation
    http://www.ucl.ac.uk/openlearning/research.htm

[^58]: Caldicott Guardian Manual 2010, Department of Health, 2010
    http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009\_tcm41-193140.pdf

[^59]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^60]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^61]: General Practice Extraction Service: Information Governance
    Principles, NHS Information Centre, 2010.
    <http://www.ic.nhs.uk/webfiles/Services/in%20development/gpes/20100528%20GPES%20IG%20Principles%20paper%20v1%200.pdf>

[^62]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^63]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^64]: Confidentiality: disclosing information about serious
    communicable diseases, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_disclosing_info_serious_commun_diseases_2009.pdf>

[^65]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^66]: Confidentiality: reporting concerns to about a patient to the
    DVLA or the DVA, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_reporting_concerns_DVLA_2009.pdf>

[^67]: Confidentiality: reporting gunshot and knife wound, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_reporting_gunshot_wounds_2009.pdf>

[^68]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^69]: GMC Confidentiality: Disclosing records for financial and
    administrative purposes (2009).
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^70]: Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services, Personal Medical Services and Alternative Provider Medical
    Services Code of Practice, DH, 2005.
    <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_4107303>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services (GMS), Section 17c Agreements, and Health Board Primary
    Medical Services (HBPMS) Directions 2005 and Code of Practice,
    Scottish Executive Health Department, 2005.
    <http://www.paymodernisation.scot.nhs.uk/gms/leg_guide/legislation/cop%20confidentiality%20and%20disclosure%20of%20Information.doc>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services and Alternative Provide Medical Services (APMS) Directions
    2006 and Code of Practice, Welsh Assembly Government, 2005.
    <http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sites3/Documents/480/The%5FConfidentiality%5Fand%5FDisclosure%5Fof%5FInformation%2DCode%5Fof%5FPractice131005.pdf>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services and Alternative Provider Medical Services Directions
    (Northern Ireland) 2006 and Code of Practice, Department of Health,
    Social Services and Public Safety, 2005.
    <http://www.dhsspsni.gov.uk/code_of_practice_on_confidentiality.pdf>

[^71]: Confidentiality and disclosure of information to PCTs in primary
    care settings -- Guidance for GPs, BMA, 2007.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/Guidance+for+GP's+on+confidentiality+and+disclosure+of+information+for+secondary+uses+-+August+2007_tcm41-146813.pdf>

[^72]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^73]: The Health Service (Control of Patient Information) Regulations,
    Department of Health, 2002
    <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2002/20021438.htm>

[^74]: National Information Governance Board for Health and Social Care,
    Ethics and Confidentiality Committee.
    <http://www.nigb.nhs.uk/ecc/about>

[^75]: Confidentiality: Research and other secondary uses, GMC, 200.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality_40_50_research_and_secondary_issues.asp>

[^76]: Confidentiality NHS Code of Practice, NHS, 2003.
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/codes/confcode.pdf>

[^77]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^78]: Confidentiality: Research and other secondary uses, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality_40_50_research_and_secondary_issues.asp>

[^79]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^80]: 0-18 years guidance: Principles of confidentiality, GMC, 2007.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/children_guidance_42_43_principles_of_confidentiality.asp>

[^81]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^82]: Confidentiality guidance: Disclosures about patients who lack
    capacity to consent, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality_57_63_patients_who_lack_capacity.asp>

[^83]: Rethinking Informed Consent in Bioethics. Neil C Manson and Onora
    O'Neill. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge 2007.

[^84]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^85]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^86]: Informing Shared Clinical Care: Final Report of the Shared Record
    Professional Guidance project, RCGP and NHS Connecting for Health,
    2009.
    <http://www.rcgp.org.uk/PDF/Get_Involved_SRPG_final_ref_report.pdf>

[^87]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^88]: Confidentiality NHS Code of Practice, NHS, 2003.
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/codes/confcode.pdf>

[^89]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^90]: Clause 450 of the standard GMS contract and the NHS (PMS)
    (Miscellaneous Amendments) Regs 2010 (SI 2010/578)

[^91]: The Care Record Guarantee, NHS, 2009, p16.
    <http://www.nigb.nhs.uk/guarantee/2009-nhs-crg.pdf>

[^92]: Confidentiality and disclosure of information to PCTs in primary
    care settings -- Guidance for GPs, BMA, 2007.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/Guidance+for+GP's+on+confidentiality+and+disclosure+of+information+for+secondary+uses+-+August+2007_tcm41-146813.pdf>

[^93]: Legal Guidance on the Data Protection Act (1998), Information
    Commissioner's Office
    <http://www.ico.gov.uk/upload/documents/library/data_protection/detailed_specialist_guides/data_protection_act_legal_guidance.pdf>

[^94]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^95]: Confidentiality NHS Code of Practice, NHS, 2003.
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/codes/confcode.pdf>

[^96]: Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services, Personal Medical Services and Alternative Provider Medical
    Services Code of Practice, DH, 2005.
    <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_4107303>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services (GMS), Section 17c Agreements, and Health Board Primary
    Medical Services (HBPMS) Directions 2005 and Code of Practice,
    Scottish Executive Health Department, 2005.
    <http://www.paymodernisation.scot.nhs.uk/gms/leg_guide/legislation/cop%20confidentiality%20and%20disclosure%20of%20Information.doc>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services and Alternative Provide Medical Services (APMS) Directions
    2006 and Code of Practice, Welsh Assembly Government, 2005.
    <http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sites3/Documents/480/The%5FConfidentiality%5Fand%5FDisclosure%5Fof%5FInformation%2DCode%5Fof%5FPractice131005.pdf>

    Confidentiality and Disclosure of Information: General Medical
    Services and Alternative Provider Medical Services Directions
    (Northern Ireland) 2006 and Code of Practice, Department of Health,
    Social Services and Public Safety, 2005.
    <http://www.dhsspsni.gov.uk/code_of_practice_on_confidentiality.pdf>

[^97]: Confidentiality and disclosure of information to PCTs in primary
    care settings -- Guidance for GPs, BMA, 2007.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/Guidance+for+GP's+on+confidentiality+and+disclosure+of+information+for+secondary+uses+-+August+2007_tcm41-146813.pdf>

[^98]: Confidentiality: disclosing records for financial and
    administrative purposes, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_disclosing_records_financial_2009.pdf>

[^99]: Good practice in research and Consent to research, GMC, 2010.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Research_guidance_FINAL.pdf>

[^100]: Summary of Responses to the Consultation on Additional Uses of
    Patient Data, Research Capability Programme, NHS Connecting for
    Health, 2009.
    <http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_110715.pdf>

[^101]: GMC Confidentiality 2009
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality_glossary.asp>

[^102]: The Caldicott Committee Report on the Review of
    Patient-Identifiable Information, DH, 1997.
    <http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_4068404.pdf>

[^103]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^104]: Towards Consensus for Best Practice: use of records from general
    practice for research, Wellcome Trust, 2009.
    <http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/stellent/groups/corporatesite/@policy_communications/documents/web_document/wtx055660.pdf>

[^105]: Pseudonymisation Implementation Project (PIP) Reference Paper 1,
    Guidance on Terminology, NHS Information Centre, NHS Connecting for
    Health, 2009.
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/sus/delivery/pseudo/pipterminologyguidancefv1ajan10.pdf>

[^106]: General Practice Research Database.
    <http://www.gprd.com/contributing/faqs.asp#confidentiality>

[^107]: Confidentiality and disclosure of health information tool kit,
    BMA, 2009.
    <http://www.bma.org.uk/images/confidentialitytoolkitdec2009_tcm41-193140.pdf>

[^108]: Pseudonymisation Implementation Project (PIP) Reference Paper 1,
    Guidance on Terminology, NHS Information Centre, NHS Connecting for
    Health, 2009.
    <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/sus/delivery/pseudo/pipterminologyguidancefv1ajan10.pdf>

[^109]: General Practice Research Database.
    <http://www.gprd.com/contributing/faqs.asp#confidentiality>

[^110]: QResearch, a new ethical high quality general practice derived
    database for research, QResearch, 2003.
    <http://www.qresearch.org/Public_Documents/QRESEARCH_protocol_May03.pdf>

[^111]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^112]: Confidentiality: Research and other secondary uses, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality_40_50_research_and_secondary_issues.asp>

[^113]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^114]: The Information tribunal case of Bluck v Epsom & St Helier Trust
    and the case of Lewis v SS of State for Health both give some legal
    basis to this clear ethical argument.

[^115]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^116]: Legal Guidance on the Data Protection Act (1998), Information
    Commissioner's Office
    <http://www.ico.gov.uk/upload/documents/library/data_protection/detailed_specialist_guides/data_protection_act_legal_guidance.pdf>

[^117]: Legal Guidance on the Data Protection Act (1998), Information
    Commissioner's Office
    <http://www.ico.gov.uk/upload/documents/library/data_protection/detailed_specialist_guides/data_protection_act_legal_guidance.pdf>

[^118]: Confidentiality, GMC, 2009.
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/static/documents/content/Confidentiality_core_2009.pdf>

[^119]: Data Sharing Review Report, 2008.
    <http://www.justice.gov.uk/reviews/docs/data-sharing-review-report.pdf>

[^120]: Response to the Data Sharing Review Report, Ministry of Justice,
    2008. <http://justive.gov.uk/docs/response-data-sharing-review.pdf>

[^121]: <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_113613>

[^122]: <http://www.nigb.nhs.uk/guarantee>

[^123]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/infogov/igsoc/faqs/igt>
