Chapter 8f - High Quality Medication Records & The Electronic Prescription Service


**8f.1** **Introduction**

NHS Connecting for Health has developed the Electronic Prescription
Service (EPS). This new service enables GP practices to send an
electronic prescription message to a central store -- the 'Spine' from
where it can be downloaded for dispensing at the patient's chosen
pharmacy or appliance contractor. In the majority of cases this can
happen without the need for a paper prescription. Walk-in centres and
other NHS settings where dispensing takes place can also use EPS. There
is less need for patients with repeat prescriptions to go to their GP
practice just to collect their paper prescription.

Community pharmacies and dispensing appliance contractors will also be
heavily involved in using EPS.

**8f.2 High quality medication records**

High quality medication information is important for a number of
reasons:

-   *It is clearly clinically import to be able to view a high quality
    prescribing record*

-   *Most systems have automated decision support which check such
    things as interactions, allergies, sensitivities and
    contraindication and can only do this insofar as they have a high
    quality computable medication record.*

-   *Systems also provide a range of medicines management facilities and
    these too require a high quality computable medication record.*

The quality of the medication record will depend on two things;

-   *How effectively the prescribing facilities in your system are
    used.*

-   *How effectively the recording of medicines not prescribed by the
    practice is handled*

Users will automatically generate most of a typical GP medication record
as they use the system to produce prescriptions and these records should
accurately reflect prescriptions produced by the system and subsequent
actions in relation to prescriptions issues. However to ensure that this
is case users of systems should ensure that;

-   *No handwritten changes are made to computer-generated prescription
    including the manual addition or deletion of items. Always cancel
    the prescription and issue a new corrected prescription.*

-   *Where a script is not subsequently issued to the patient or
    returned unused it should be destroyed and recorded as cancelled on
    the system.*

-   *Where a pharmacy queries a prescription and changes are agreed a
    new prescription should be issued to the pharmacy who should be
    asked to return the old prescription for cancellation as above. In
    the case of a script sent by ETP the script should be cancelled and
    a new script issued electronically.*

-   *Handwritten prescription issued by the practice should be recorded
    on the system. All systems provide facilities to record a
    prescription without generating a new paper or electronic
    prescription.*

-   *Where an item is discontinued for a reason which mean you would not
    wish to use that medicine with the patient in future (e.g.
    Intolerance or ineffective) the fact and reason of discontinuation
    should be record as some system will warn the prescriber if they
    attempt to prescribe a medication previously discontinued in such
    circumstances *

It is also important that medicines not prescribed by the practice but
which are of future clinical significance are recorded on the practice
system. Discovering and recording all medication taken by the patient
can be onerous and practices need to establish a policy, which defines
the circumstances in which they consider it useful and practical to
record such information, which might include;

-   *Medicines prescribed by other healthcare professionals.*

-   *Over the counter and general sale (including those purchased
    online) medicines bought and taken by the patient.*

-   *Herbal preparations bought and taken by the patient*

In general practices should seek to discover and record any medicines
that patients are taking on a continuing basis. Some examples of
situations where patients might be taking medicines not prescribed by
the practice of particular clinical significance include;

-   *Psychiatric drugs being managed by mental health and home treatment
    teams including depot injections.*

-   *Chemotherapy being managed by cancer treatment services*

-   *Immunosuppressant drugs being managed by in secondary care
    following transplant surgery or for the treatment of autoimmune
    diseases*

How information is recorded will depend on the purpose to which the
information will be put which falls into two categories;

-   *Medicines where the practice will be taking over ongoing
    prescribing (e.g. hospital outpatient of discharge medication where
    the GP has agreed to take over ongoing prescribing). In this a new
    prescription should be issued from the agreed date of transfer of
    care with details of any current prescription issued elsewhere
    record as such.*

-   *Medicines where the practice will not be taking over ongoing
    prescribing. In the case the medication should be record as being
    managed elsewhere such that prescriptions for the item cannot easily
    be accidentally produced by the practice system*

Systems handle the recording of prescription issued elsewhere in
different ways and few systems fully support the recording of the
partial data that might be all that is necessary or available when
medicines are managed elsewhere. Ideally information should be recorded
so that it appears on medication lists and is available in a computable
form to prescribing decision support tools. Users should seek system
specific advice from their supplier.

Where is not possible to record medicines managed elsewhere in the
medication record a note or alert should be placed elsewhere in the
record such that prescribers will be warn of the existence of such
prescribing. Again the best way to do this will depend on the system in
use and Users should seek system specific advice from their supplier.

**\
**

**8f.3 Why is the EPS service being introduced?**

Around 1.5 million prescriptions are now being issued every working day
in England, and this figure is expected to continue rising by 5% each
year. The move from the current paper-based system to an electronic one
should be:

-   *More efficient*

-   *Consistently accurate*

-   *Better able to cope with expected further increases in prescription
    volumes.*

**8f.4 Different Releases in EPS**

**Release 1** of EPS introduced the technical infrastructure to enable
prescribers and dispensers to operate EPS. Release 1 will still print
the prescription (which in itself is the legal entity) and it will have
a barcode at the side. Release 1 has also allowed robust testing of the
infrastructure of EPS and Release 2 will help practices to reduce the
administrative burden associated with generating large volumes of repeat
prescriptions.

**Release 2** allows both the prescribing information and the advanced
electronic signature to be sent from the prescriber's computer to the
patient's nominated pharmacy (explained below). It also allows
electronic cancellation of prescriptions, which increases safety and the
whole process is smoother if electronic repeat dispensing is used by the
practice. Release 2 also allows electronic submission requests for
reimbursement endorsements.

**\
**

**Figure 8f.4 -- EPS Release 2 token with barcode**

![](media/image1.png){width="5.2555555555555555in"
height="4.344444444444444in"}

**Figure 8f.5 EPS Release 2 Functionality**

**8f.5 EPS Release 2**

**8f.5.1.** If a patient chooses to nominate a pharmacy, prescribers
will no longer need to generate a paper token (unless they want to or
are asked to do so by the patient). This will not only reduce the
prescriber's workload, but also the workload of administrative staff who
usually issue and sort repeat prescriptions to patients (and pharmacy
collection services).

**8f.5.2.** Release 2 will make it easier to administer repeat
dispensing regimes. This will reduce the administrative burden
associated with patients requesting regular repeat prescriptions. Where
a repeat dispensing regime is administered, the prescriber will only
need to print a single prescription token as opposed to a number of
paper batch issues as at present. Prescribers will also be able to
cancel electronic prescriptions making it possible for them to maintain
an element of control over the repeat dispensing regime.

EPS will not limit patient access to their medications. If a patient
wishes they can choose not to send a prescription electronically. They
can request for a paper prescription to be printed and they can take
that away with them to a pharmacy of their choice for dispensing.

**8f.5.3 Prescribing Tokens**

A practice can issue paper tokens at any time. They must also be issued
in the following situations;

-   *At the start of a repeat dispensing regime*

-   *Where clinical information needs to be communicated to the patient
    (i.e. on the 'right hand side' of the prescription)*

-   *At a patients request*

-   *If the prescriber deems it necessary to do so*

**8f.5.3 Nomination**

A patient can nominate three different types of dispensers -- one in
each field;

-   *Community pharmacy of their choice*

-   *Dispensing GP practice -- if they are classed as a dispensing
    patient*

-   *Dispensing Appliance Contractor if they receive such items*

Patients can change their nomination by asking their pharmacist to do
this for them or patients can ask their GP practice to do this.

**8f.5.3 Acute and Repeat Medication**

Messages will be transmitted from the prescriber's computer at different
times depending on the type of message. An acute authorisation of
medication will be sent immediately via the Spine to the nominated
pharmacy in readiness for dispensing. If a prescriber renews and issues
repeat medication on their terminal then the message will also be sent
immediately to the nominated pharmacy. If however repeat medication is
'bulk signed' then that message will be sent overnight to the nominated
pharmacy.

**8f.5.3 Advance Electronic Signatures**

These are unique to an individual user and applied by using their
Smartcard and pass-code. The Smartcard allows different users to have
different levels of access depending on their role within their
organisation. It is the application of the advance electronic signature
to the electronic message that turns it into a legal prescription.

**\
**

**8f.5.4 Electronic Repeat Dispensing**

Patients do not have to go to the same dispenser every time to get their
repeatable prescription fulfilled. If a patient wishes to have more than
one issue dispensed at the same time (e.g. if they are going on holiday
etc.) then they can request this.

Existing agreements in place for paper based repeat dispensing can be
used for electronic repeat dispensing. If a patient can be transferred
manually from paper based repeat dispensing to electronic repeat
dispensing the prescribing system will notify the prescriber. A patient
will always receive a prescription token when they receive a repeatable
prescription and the patient can use this token to get medication
dispensed from any EPS Release 2 dispenser.

When a patient changes their nominated dispenser, all repeatable
prescription issues not downloaded will transfer to the new nominated
dispenser however all items on a repeatable prescription issue must be
processed (dispensed or not dispensed) before the next issue can be
released

**8f.5.5 Electronic Cancellation**

A prescriber (or an authorised member of staff) can cancel an electronic
prescription at any point prior to it being downloaded from the 'spine'
by a pharmacist for dispensing. GP clinical systems will allow
cancellation of either the whole prescriptions or individual items on
that prescription. The reason for cancellation can also be added to the
record.

Prescriptions cannot be amended once sent -- they must be cancelled and
regenerated.

**8f.5.6 Controlled Drugs**

Initially, arrangements for dispensing controlled drugs will remain the
same, with all controlled drugs to be prescribed using paper
prescriptions. They will not be transferred electronically. Work is
being undertaken to ensure that controlled drugs will be part of the
electronic message as soon as possible.

**8f.5.7 Mapping of Drugs**

Every drug has an electronic code, which is sent to the Spine. There are
a small percentage of common drugs that have not got the necessary
coding structure to allow the message to be sent. If this is the case
then that drug will be printed out on a prescription to be handed to the
patient. If there are other items on the prescription that can be sent
to the Spine because they have the correct coding then they will be
processed without being printed out. (This is system dependant).

Further work is being undertaken to ensure that most of the remaining
unmapped drugs will have the correct coding structure.

**8f.6 Getting Ready for EPS**

In order for a practice to be ready for when EPS release 2 is switched
on then they should ensure they work closely with their PCT (or
successor organisation) during the transition to EPS R2;

-   *Prescribing and dispensing processes are centred around the
    patient*

-   *Practices and dispensers work in partnership*

-   *PCTs must broaden and deepen their approach to support IT enabled
    change*

GP practices can change their clinical processes by reviewing how;

-   *Prescribers can take advantage of enabling repeat dispensing*

-   *Practice staff can manage the repeat dispensing process along with
    medication review and reauthorisation processes using protocols
    designed by the clinical staff*

All of the GP software system suppliers are working with CfH to enable
Release 2. Some are at different stages of preparation and up to date
information is published on the NHS CfH website[^1]

**8f.7 EPS consultation process**

In order to deliver a robust and fit for purpose system, NHS CfH has
actively sought input from key stakeholders throughout the design and
development of the Electronic Prescription Service.

Purpose-formed user groups, meeting on a regular basis, have provided
different perspectives on key design issues. This work has included
looking at the live operation of the service in the initial implementer
sites.

Reviewing the early operational experiences at these sites has helped to
ensure that the potential benefits of the new service can be maximised.
The output from these groups has been and will continue to be used to
inform communication and guidance material.

The user groups include the;

-   *the general practitioner and community pharmacy user group*

-   *the patient and public user group*

-   *the dispensing appliance contractor user group*

The user groups will continue to operate during the implementation of
EPS Release 2.

**8f.8 Benefits for patients and carers**

Some of the major benefits will be to patients who will find it much
easier to order and collect their prescriptions. They should also find;

-   *Reduction in the need to contact the GP practice to reorder and
    collect prescriptions, particularly once they are on an electronic
    repeat dispensing regime.*

-   *Greater freedom of choice, making it simpler to use a pharmacist
    convenient to them.*

-   *Potential to reduce waiting times as the pharmacist can prepare
    medication items in advance of patient arriving.*

-   *Improved patient safety with electronic cancellation increasing the
    ability to ensure patients do not receive medication they should not
    be taking and it also allows prescribers to make any immediate
    changes in medication that are necessary after prescribing.*

**8f.9 Benefits for Prescribers**

Prescribers in the NHS should have a streamlined service along with;

-   *Reduction in workload for staff at GP practices generated by
    patients collecting individual prescriptions from the GP surgery.*

-   *The ability to sign prescriptions electronically will be more
    efficient for GPs.*

-   *The ability for GPs to electronically cancel prescriptions at any
    point until they are downloaded prior to being dispensed.*

-   *With repeat dispensing regimes in place in a practice the
    prescriber has more control over drugs prescribed for a patient.*

-   *In time, will remove the need for pharmacy staff to collect
    prescriptions where they offer a prescription collection service.*

EPS will allow new ways of working. It could allow further enhancement
of the telephone consultation and allow prescribers to send an
electronic message to the patients nominated pharmacy for medicines that
the prescriber deems necessary.

**8f.10 Smartcards**

In order to ensure that only authorised personnel are able to access the
Electronic Prescription Service, access will be via the NHS Smartcard.

The Smartcard will grant users with different levels of access depending
on their function within the prescribing/dispensing process.
Essentially, people with the appropriate level of access to the system
will only see details of the prescription. This makes EPS safer both for
patients and clinicians.

**8f.11 Release 2 readiness (& figure)**

PCTs must be ready to implement Release 2 in their area before they can
move forward. A PCT must be included in the EPS Authorisation Directions
before prescribers in that PCT can apply an electronic signature to
prescriptions. This requires approval by the Dept of Health and a notice
period of 3 months. There is no restriction on any dispensing contractor
wishing to implement an accredited EPS Release 2 dispensing system.

[\
]{.underline}

**8f.12 Security & confidentiality**

The strongest security measures are in place and patients can choose
whether to have their health information shared[^2].

Although the new systems and services are changing the way in which
patients\' health information is stored and shared, they will not change
the duty or commitment of the NHS to keep patients\' health information
safe, secure and confidential[^3].

The NHS Care Record Guarantee[^4] sets out the rules that govern
information held in the NHS Care Records Service[^5]. It covers
people\'s access to their own records, controls on others\' access, how
access will be monitored and policed, options people have to further
limit access, access in an emergency, and what happens when someone
cannot make decisions for themselves.

**8f.13 Access control**

All NHS staff using the new systems and services must register to be an
authorised user and be issued with an NHS Smartcard[^6].

Even then, authorised staff can only see a patient\'s information if
they have a \'legitimate relationship\' with them, which means they are
involved in that patients' care[^7]. They only see the information they
need to do their job.

Users should ensure that they take reasonable precautions to maintain
patient privacy and confidentiality in the workplace (e.g. log-out when
leaving a terminal and ensuring screens cannot be viewed by unauthorised
individuals)

An audit trail noting when, where and by whom patient records are
accessed, will help to assure confidentiality.

**8f.14 EPS unsupported prescriptions**

The following prescribing models are not supported at present and,
therefore, still require a hand-signed FP10 paper prescription:

-   *Scenarios where the prescriber does not have access to the EPS (for
    example home visits and out of hours)*

-   *Personal administration of medication *

-   *Private prescriptions*

-   *Bulk prescriptions (Drug Tariff Part VIII note 9) for a school or
    institution*

-   *Controlled drugs - Schedule 1, 2 or 3 of the Misuse of Drugs
    Regulations *

-   *When the patient chooses not have an electronic prescription*

-   *In the initial stages of the EPS where a patient has not nominated
    a dispensing contractor*

-   *Where the prescription contains one of the very limited number of
    items that are not directly expressible using the NHS Dictionary of
    Medicines and Devices (dm+d).*

[^1]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/eps/staff/roadmap>

[^2]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/eps/staff/faq/6>

[^3]: GMC Confidentiality
    <http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/ethical_guidance/confidentiality.asp>

[^4]: <http://www.nigb.nhs.uk/guarantee>

[^5]: <http://www.nhscarerecords.nhs.uk/about/>

[^6]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/rasmartcards>

[^7]: <http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/scr/staff/impguidpm/ig/legitrelate#type>
