GPGv4 -- Executive Summary


A recent joint review by representatives of the Department of Health
Informatics Directorate and the BMA & RCGP Joint GP IT Committee
(JGPITC) concluded that there was a continuing need for professionally
owned, authoritative guidance to update the Good Practice Guidelines for
GP electronic patient records v3.1 (GPGv3.1 2005). The new Good Practice
Guidelines for GP electronic patient records v4 (GPGv4 2011) would act
as a reference source of information for all those involved in
developing, deploying and using general practice IT systems. GPGv4 would
also need to maintain and update the link between earlier versions of
the GPG and the GMS & PMS regulations.

The joint review of the scope and content of GPGv3.1 demonstrated the
need for a complete re-write of the guidelines to include all the
existing sections, and extend the scope to include new services (e.g.
Summary Care Record, Electronic Prescription Service & GP2GP messaging)
into the mainstream guidance. The review also concluded that there is a
need to develop new guidance in areas such as high quality clinical
records and data quality to facilitate records sharing,
inter-operability and communication.

From a strategic perspective, GPs are increasingly likely to share their
record systems with other health professionals and electronic patient
records may have multiple contributors over time. For this reason the
inter-operability of records and the quality of the health data they
contain will be the central themes of the revised GPGv4, described
within a clinical safety framework. The overall GPGv4 project brings
together the various chapters and strands that will make up the guidance
to ensure that our electronic patient records are "fit for sharing" in a
modern NHS.

Principal areas covered in the GPGv4 project are organised under the
following chapter headings;

1.  Strategic Context for the Good Practice Guidelines for GP electronic
    patient records v4 (2010)

2.  The Purposes of Health Records

3.  Clinical Safety Assurance

4.  Records Governance

5.  Shared Electronic Patient Records

6.  High Quality Patient Records

7.  Clinical Coding Schemes

8.  Data Transfer & Interoperability

    a.  The Personal Demographic Service

    b.  GP2GP Electronic Record Transfer

    c.  Data Migration

    d.  Clinical Messaging

    e.  The Summary Care Record and Emergency Care Summary

    f.  High Quality Medication Records & The Electronic Prescription
        Service

9.  A Pathway to Good Paperless Practice

10. Electronic Document Attachments

11. Working in an e-business Environment

12. Education and Training
